INTRODUCTION.


When on board H.M.S. ‘Beagle,’ as naturalist, I was much struck with
certain facts in the distribution of the inhabitants of South America,
and in the geological relations of the present to the past inhabitants
of that continent. These facts seemed to me to throw some light on the
origin of species—that mystery of mysteries, as it has been called by
one of our greatest philosophers. On my return home, it occurred to me,
in 1837, that something might perhaps be made out on this question by
patiently accumulating and reflecting on all sorts of facts which could
possibly have any bearing on it. After five years’ work I allowed
myself to speculate on the subject, and drew up some short notes; these
I enlarged in 1844 into a sketch of the conclusions, which then seemed
to me probable: from that period to the present day I have steadily
pursued the same object. I hope that I may be excused for entering on
these personal details, as I give them to show that I have not been
hasty in coming to a decision.

My work is now nearly finished; but as it will take me two or three
more years to complete it, and as my health is far from strong, I have
been urged to publish this Abstract. I have more especially been
induced to do this, as Mr. Wallace, who is now studying the
natural history of the Malay archipelago, has arrived at almost exactly
the same general conclusions that I have on the origin of species. Last
year he sent to me a memoir on this subject, with a request that I
would forward it to Sir Charles Lyell, who sent it to the Linnean
Society, and it is published in the third volume of the Journal of that
Society. Sir C. Lyell and Dr. Hooker, who both knew of my work—the
latter having read my sketch of 1844—honoured me by thinking it
advisable to publish, with Mr. Wallace’s excellent memoir, some brief
extracts from my manuscripts.

This Abstract, which I now publish, must necessarily be imperfect. I
cannot here give references and authorities for my several statements;
and I must trust to the reader reposing some confidence in my accuracy.
No doubt errors will have crept in, though I hope I have always been
cautious in trusting to good authorities alone. I can here give only
the general conclusions at which I have arrived, with a few facts in
illustration, but which, I hope, in most cases will suffice. No one can
feel more sensible than I do of the necessity of hereafter publishing
in detail all the facts, with references, on which my conclusions have
been grounded; and I hope in a future work to do this. For I am well
aware that scarcely a single point is discussed in this volume on which
facts cannot be adduced, often apparently leading to conclusions
directly opposite to those at which I have arrived. A fair result can
be obtained only by fully stating and balancing the facts and arguments
on both sides of each question; and this cannot possibly be here done.

I much regret that want of space prevents my having the satisfaction of
acknowledging the generous assistance which I have received from very
many naturalists, some of them personally unknown to me. I cannot,
however,
let this opportunity pass without expressing my deep obligations to Dr.
Hooker, who for the last fifteen years has aided me in every possible
way by his large stores of knowledge and his excellent judgment.

In considering the Origin of Species, it is quite conceivable that a
naturalist, reflecting on the mutual affinities of organic beings, on
their embryological relations, their geographical distribution,
geological succession, and other such facts, might come to the
conclusion that each species had not been independently created, but
had descended, like varieties, from other species. Nevertheless, such a
conclusion, even if well founded, would be unsatisfactory, until it
could be shown how the innumerable species inhabiting this world have
been modified, so as to acquire that perfection of structure and
coadaptation which most justly excites our admiration. Naturalists
continually refer to external conditions, such as climate, food, etc.,
as the only possible cause of variation. In one very limited sense, as
we shall hereafter see, this may be true; but it is preposterous to
attribute to mere external conditions, the structure, for instance, of
the woodpecker, with its feet, tail, beak, and tongue, so admirably
adapted to catch insects under the bark of trees. In the case of the
misseltoe, which draws its nourishment from certain trees, which has
seeds that must be transported by certain birds, and which has flowers
with separate sexes absolutely requiring the agency of certain insects
to bring pollen from one flower to the other, it is equally
preposterous to account for the structure of this parasite, with its
relations to several distinct organic beings, by the effects of
external conditions, or of habit, or of the volition of the plant
itself.

The author of the ‘Vestiges of Creation’ would, I presume, say that,
after a certain unknown number of
generations, some bird had given birth to a woodpecker, and some plant
to the misseltoe, and that these had been produced perfect as we now
see them; but this assumption seems to me to be no explanation, for it
leaves the case of the coadaptations of organic beings to each other
and to their physical conditions of life, untouched and unexplained.

It is, therefore, of the highest importance to gain a clear insight
into the means of modification and coadaptation. At the commencement of
my observations it seemed to me probable that a careful study of
domesticated animals and of cultivated plants would offer the best
chance of making out this obscure problem. Nor have I been
disappointed; in this and in all other perplexing cases I have
invariably found that our knowledge, imperfect though it be, of
variation under domestication, afforded the best and safest clue. I may
venture to express my conviction of the high value of such studies,
although they have been very commonly neglected by naturalists.

From these considerations, I shall devote the first chapter of this
Abstract to Variation under Domestication. We shall thus see that a
large amount of hereditary modification is at least possible, and, what
is equally or more important, we shall see how great is the power of
man in accumulating by his Selection successive slight variations. I
will then pass on to the variability of species in a state of nature;
but I shall, unfortunately, be compelled to treat this subject far too
briefly, as it can be treated properly only by giving long catalogues
of facts. We shall, however, be enabled to discuss what circumstances
are most favourable to variation. In the next chapter the Struggle for
Existence amongst all organic beings throughout the world, which
inevitably follows from their high geometrical powers of
increase, will be treated of. This is the doctrine of Malthus, applied
to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms. As many more individuals of
each species are born than can possibly survive; and as, consequently,
there is a frequently recurring struggle for existence, it follows that
any being, if it vary however slightly in any manner profitable to
itself, under the complex and sometimes varying conditions of life,
will have a better chance of surviving, and thus be _naturally
selected_. From the strong principle of inheritance, any selected
variety will tend to propagate its new and modified form.

This fundamental subject of Natural Selection will be treated at some
length in the fourth chapter; and we shall then see how Natural
Selection almost inevitably causes much Extinction of the less improved
forms of life and induces what I have called Divergence of Character.
In the next chapter I shall discuss the complex and little known laws
of variation and of correlation of growth. In the four succeeding
chapters, the most apparent and gravest difficulties on the theory will
be given: namely, first, the difficulties of transitions, or in
understanding how a simple being or a simple organ can be changed and
perfected into a highly developed being or elaborately constructed
organ; secondly the subject of Instinct, or the mental powers of
animals, thirdly, Hybridism, or the infertility of species and the
fertility of varieties when intercrossed; and fourthly, the
imperfection of the Geological Record. In the next chapter I shall
consider the geological succession of organic beings throughout time;
in the eleventh and twelfth, their geographical distribution throughout
space; in the thirteenth, their classification or mutual affinities,
both when mature and in an embryonic condition. In the last chapter I
shall give a
brief recapitulation of the whole work, and a few concluding remarks.

No one ought to feel surprise at much remaining as yet unexplained in
regard to the origin of species and varieties, if he makes due
allowance for our profound ignorance in regard to the mutual relations
of all the beings which live around us. Who can explain why one species
ranges widely and is very numerous, and why another allied species has
a narrow range and is rare? Yet these relations are of the highest
importance, for they determine the present welfare, and, as I believe,
the future success and modification of every inhabitant of this world.
Still less do we know of the mutual relations of the innumerable
inhabitants of the world during the many past geological epochs in its
history. Although much remains obscure, and will long remain obscure, I
can entertain no doubt, after the most deliberate study and
dispassionate judgment of which I am capable, that the view which most
naturalists entertain, and which I formerly entertained—namely, that
each species has been independently created—is erroneous. I am fully
convinced that species are not immutable; but that those belonging to
what are called the same genera are lineal descendants of some other
and generally extinct species, in the same manner as the acknowledged
varieties of any one species are the descendants of that species.
Furthermore, I am convinced that Natural Selection has been the main
but not exclusive means of modification.




CHAPTER I.
VARIATION UNDER DOMESTICATION.


Causes of Variability. Effects of Habit. Correlation of Growth.
Inheritance. Character of Domestic Varieties. Difficulty of
distinguishing between Varieties and Species. Origin of Domestic
Varieties from one or more Species. Domestic Pigeons, their Differences
and Origin. Principle of Selection anciently followed, its Effects.
Methodical and Unconscious Selection. Unknown Origin of our Domestic
Productions. Circumstances favourable to Man’s power of Selection.


When we look to the individuals of the same variety or sub-variety of
our older cultivated plants and animals, one of the first points which
strikes us, is, that they generally differ much more from each other,
than do the individuals of any one species or variety in a state of
nature. When we reflect on the vast diversity of the plants and animals
which have been cultivated, and which have varied during all ages under
the most different climates and treatment, I think we are driven to
conclude that this greater variability is simply due to our domestic
productions having been raised under conditions of life not so uniform
as, and somewhat different from, those to which the parent-species have
been exposed under nature. There is, also, I think, some probability in
the view propounded by Andrew Knight, that this variability may be
partly connected with excess of food. It seems pretty clear that
organic beings must be exposed during several generations to the new
conditions of life to cause any appreciable amount of variation; and
that when the organisation has once begun to vary, it generally
continues to vary for many generations.
No case is on record of a variable being ceasing to be variable under
cultivation. Our oldest cultivated plants, such as wheat, still often
yield new varieties: our oldest domesticated animals are still capable
of rapid improvement or modification.

It has been disputed at what period of life the causes of variability,
whatever they may be, generally act; whether during the early or late
period of development of the embryo, or at the instant of conception.
Geoffroy St. Hilaire’s experiments show that unnatural treatment of the
embryo causes monstrosities; and monstrosities cannot be separated by
any clear line of distinction from mere variations. But I am strongly
inclined to suspect that the most frequent cause of variability may be
attributed to the male and female reproductive elements having been
affected prior to the act of conception. Several reasons make me
believe in this; but the chief one is the remarkable effect which
confinement or cultivation has on the functions of the reproductive
system; this system appearing to be far more susceptible than any other
part of the organisation, to the action of any change in the conditions
of life. Nothing is more easy than to tame an animal, and few things
more difficult than to get it to breed freely under confinement, even
in the many cases when the male and female unite. How many animals
there are which will not breed, though living long under not very close
confinement in their native country! This is generally attributed to
vitiated instincts; but how many cultivated plants display the utmost
vigour, and yet rarely or never seed! In some few such cases it has
been found out that very trifling changes, such as a little more or
less water at some particular period of growth, will determine whether
or not the plant sets a seed. I cannot here enter on the copious
details which I have collected on
this curious subject; but to show how singular the laws are which
determine the reproduction of animals under confinement, I may just
mention that carnivorous animals, even from the tropics, breed in this
country pretty freely under confinement, with the exception of the
plantigrades or bear family; whereas, carnivorous birds, with the
rarest exceptions, hardly ever lay fertile eggs. Many exotic plants
have pollen utterly worthless, in the same exact condition as in the
most sterile hybrids. When, on the one hand, we see domesticated
animals and plants, though often weak and sickly, yet breeding quite
freely under confinement; and when, on the other hand, we see
individuals, though taken young from a state of nature, perfectly
tamed, long-lived, and healthy (of which I could give numerous
instances), yet having their reproductive system so seriously affected
by unperceived causes as to fail in acting, we need not be surprised at
this system, when it does act under confinement, acting not quite
regularly, and producing offspring not perfectly like their parents or
variable.

Sterility has been said to be the bane of horticulture; but on this
view we owe variability to the same cause which produces sterility; and
variability is the source of all the choicest productions of the
garden. I may add, that as some organisms will breed most freely under
the most unnatural conditions (for instance, the rabbit and ferret kept
in hutches), showing that their reproductive system has not been thus
affected; so will some animals and plants withstand domestication or
cultivation, and vary very slightly—perhaps hardly more than in a state
of nature.

A long list could easily be given of “sporting plants;” by this term
gardeners mean a single bud or offset, which suddenly assumes a new and
sometimes very different character from that of the rest of the plant.
Such buds can be propagated by grafting, etc., and sometimes by seed.
These “sports” are extremely rare under nature, but far from rare under
cultivation; and in this case we see that the treatment of the parent
has affected a bud or offset, and not the ovules or pollen. But it is
the opinion of most physiologists that there is no essential difference
between a bud and an ovule in their earliest stages of formation; so
that, in fact, “sports” support my view, that variability may be
largely attributed to the ovules or pollen, or to both, having been
affected by the treatment of the parent prior to the act of conception.
These cases anyhow show that variation is not necessarily connected, as
some authors have supposed, with the act of generation.

Seedlings from the same fruit, and the young of the same litter,
sometimes differ considerably from each other, though both the young
and the parents, as Müller has remarked, have apparently been exposed
to exactly the same conditions of life; and this shows how unimportant
the direct effects of the conditions of life are in comparison with the
laws of reproduction, and of growth, and of inheritance; for had the
action of the conditions been direct, if any of the young had varied,
all would probably have varied in the same manner. To judge how much,
in the case of any variation, we should attribute to the direct action
of heat, moisture, light, food, etc., is most difficult: my impression
is, that with animals such agencies have produced very little direct
effect, though apparently more in the case of plants. Under this point
of view, Mr. Buckman’s recent experiments on plants seem extremely
valuable. When all or nearly all the individuals exposed to certain
conditions are affected in the same way, the change at first appears to
be directly due to such conditions; but in some cases it can be shown
that quite opposite conditions produce
similar changes of structure. Nevertheless some slight amount of change
may, I think, be attributed to the direct action of the conditions of
life—as, in some cases, increased size from amount of food, colour from
particular kinds of food and from light, and perhaps the thickness of
fur from climate.

Habit also has a decided influence, as in the period of flowering with
plants when transported from one climate to another. In animals it has
a more marked effect; for instance, I find in the domestic duck that
the bones of the wing weigh less and the bones of the leg more, in
proportion to the whole skeleton, than do the same bones in the
wild-duck; and I presume that this change may be safely attributed to
the domestic duck flying much less, and walking more, than its wild
parent. The great and inherited development of the udders in cows and
goats in countries where they are habitually milked, in comparison with
the state of these organs in other countries, is another instance of
the effect of use. Not a single domestic animal can be named which has
not in some country drooping ears; and the view suggested by some
authors, that the drooping is due to the disuse of the muscles of the
ear, from the animals not being much alarmed by danger, seems probable.

There are many laws regulating variation, some few of which can be
dimly seen, and will be hereafter briefly mentioned. I will here only
allude to what may be called correlation of growth. Any change in the
embryo or larva will almost certainly entail changes in the mature
animal. In monstrosities, the correlations between quite distinct parts
are very curious; and many instances are given in Isidore Geoffroy St.
Hilaire’s great work on this subject. Breeders believe that long limbs
are almost always accompanied by an elongated head. Some instances of
correlation are quite whimsical; thus
cats with blue eyes are invariably deaf; colour and constitutional
peculiarities go together, of which many remarkable cases could be
given amongst animals and plants. From the facts collected by
Heusinger, it appears that white sheep and pigs are differently
affected from coloured individuals by certain vegetable poisons.
Hairless dogs have imperfect teeth; long-haired and coarse-haired
animals are apt to have, as is asserted, long or many horns; pigeons
with feathered feet have skin between their outer toes; pigeons with
short beaks have small feet, and those with long beaks large feet.
Hence, if man goes on selecting, and thus augmenting, any peculiarity,
he will almost certainly unconsciously modify other parts of the
structure, owing to the mysterious laws of the correlation of growth.

The result of the various, quite unknown, or dimly seen laws of
variation is infinitely complex and diversified. It is well worth while
carefully to study the several treatises published on some of our old
cultivated plants, as on the hyacinth, potato, even the dahlia, etc.;
and it is really surprising to note the endless points in structure and
constitution in which the varieties and sub-varieties differ slightly
from each other. The whole organisation seems to have become plastic,
and tends to depart in some small degree from that of the parental
type.

Any variation which is not inherited is unimportant for us. But the
number and diversity of inheritable deviations of structure, both those
of slight and those of considerable physiological importance, is
endless. Dr. Prosper Lucas’s treatise, in two large volumes, is the
fullest and the best on this subject. No breeder doubts how strong is
the tendency to inheritance: like produces like is his fundamental
belief: doubts have been thrown on this principle by theoretical
writers alone. When a
deviation appears not unfrequently, and we see it in the father and
child, we cannot tell whether it may not be due to the same original
cause acting on both; but when amongst individuals, apparently exposed
to the same conditions, any very rare deviation, due to some
extraordinary combination of circumstances, appears in the parent—say,
once amongst several million individuals—and it reappears in the child,
the mere doctrine of chances almost compels us to attribute its
reappearance to inheritance. Every one must have heard of cases of
albinism, prickly skin, hairy bodies, etc., appearing in several
members of the same family. If strange and rare deviations of structure
are truly inherited, less strange and commoner deviations may be freely
admitted to be inheritable. Perhaps the correct way of viewing the
whole subject, would be, to look at the inheritance of every character
whatever as the rule, and non-inheritance as the anomaly.

The laws governing inheritance are quite unknown; no one can say why
the same peculiarity in different individuals of the same species, and
in individuals of different species, is sometimes inherited and
sometimes not so; why the child often reverts in certain characters to
its grandfather or grandmother or other much more remote ancestor; why
a peculiarity is often transmitted from one sex to both sexes or to one
sex alone, more commonly but not exclusively to the like sex. It is a
fact of some little importance to us, that peculiarities appearing in
the males of our domestic breeds are often transmitted either
exclusively, or in a much greater degree, to males alone. A much more
important rule, which I think may be trusted, is that, at whatever
period of life a peculiarity first appears, it tends to appear in the
offspring at a corresponding age, though sometimes earlier. In many
cases this could
not be otherwise: thus the inherited peculiarities in the horns of
cattle could appear only in the offspring when nearly mature;
peculiarities in the silkworm are known to appear at the corresponding
caterpillar or cocoon stage. But hereditary diseases and some other
facts make me believe that the rule has a wider extension, and that
when there is no apparent reason why a peculiarity should appear at any
particular age, yet that it does tend to appear in the offspring at the
same period at which it first appeared in the parent. I believe this
rule to be of the highest importance in explaining the laws of
embryology. These remarks are of course confined to the first
_appearance_ of the peculiarity, and not to its primary cause, which
may have acted on the ovules or male element; in nearly the same manner
as in the crossed offspring from a short-horned cow by a long-horned
bull, the greater length of horn, though appearing late in life, is
clearly due to the male element.

Having alluded to the subject of reversion, I may here refer to a
statement often made by naturalists—namely, that our domestic
varieties, when run wild, gradually but certainly revert in character
to their aboriginal stocks. Hence it has been argued that no deductions
can be drawn from domestic races to species in a state of nature. I
have in vain endeavoured to discover on what decisive facts the above
statement has so often and so boldly been made. There would be great
difficulty in proving its truth: we may safely conclude that very many
of the most strongly-marked domestic varieties could not possibly live
in a wild state. In many cases we do not know what the aboriginal stock
was, and so could not tell whether or not nearly perfect reversion had
ensued. It would be quite necessary, in order to prevent the effects of
intercrossing, that only a
single variety should be turned loose in its new home. Nevertheless, as
our varieties certainly do occasionally revert in some of their
characters to ancestral forms, it seems to me not improbable, that if
we could succeed in naturalising, or were to cultivate, during many
generations, the several races, for instance, of the cabbage, in very
poor soil (in which case, however, some effect would have to be
attributed to the direct action of the poor soil), that they would to a
large extent, or even wholly, revert to the wild aboriginal stock.
Whether or not the experiment would succeed, is not of great importance
for our line of argument; for by the experiment itself the conditions
of life are changed. If it could be shown that our domestic varieties
manifested a strong tendency to reversion,—that is, to lose their
acquired characters, whilst kept under unchanged conditions, and whilst
kept in a considerable body, so that free intercrossing might check, by
blending together, any slight deviations of structure, in such case, I
grant that we could deduce nothing from domestic varieties in regard to
species. But there is not a shadow of evidence in favour of this view:
to assert that we could not breed our cart and race-horses, long and
short-horned cattle, and poultry of various breeds, and esculent
vegetables, for an almost infinite number of generations, would be
opposed to all experience. I may add, that when under nature the
conditions of life do change, variations and reversions of character
probably do occur; but natural selection, as will hereafter be
explained, will determine how far the new characters thus arising shall
be preserved.

When we look to the hereditary varieties or races of our domestic
animals and plants, and compare them with species closely allied
together, we generally perceive in each domestic race, as already
remarked, less uniformity of character than in true species. Domestic
races of
the same species, also, often have a somewhat monstrous character; by
which I mean, that, although differing from each other, and from the
other species of the same genus, in several trifling respects, they
often differ in an extreme degree in some one part, both when compared
one with another, and more especially when compared with all the
species in nature to which they are nearest allied. With these
exceptions (and with that of the perfect fertility of varieties when
crossed,—a subject hereafter to be discussed), domestic races of the
same species differ from each other in the same manner as, only in most
cases in a lesser degree than, do closely-allied species of the same
genus in a state of nature. I think this must be admitted, when we find
that there are hardly any domestic races, either amongst animals or
plants, which have not been ranked by some competent judges as mere
varieties, and by other competent judges as the descendants of
aboriginally distinct species. If any marked distinction existed
between domestic races and species, this source of doubt could not so
perpetually recur. It has often been stated that domestic races do not
differ from each other in characters of generic value. I think it could
be shown that this statement is hardly correct; but naturalists differ
most widely in determining what characters are of generic value; all
such valuations being at present empirical. Moreover, on the view of
the origin of genera which I shall presently give, we have no right to
expect often to meet with generic differences in our domesticated
productions.

When we attempt to estimate the amount of structural difference between
the domestic races of the same species, we are soon involved in doubt,
from not knowing whether they have descended from one or several
parent-species. This point, if it could be cleared up, would be
interesting; if, for instance, it could be shown that the greyhound,
bloodhound, terrier, spaniel, and bull-dog, which we all know propagate
their kind so truly, were the offspring of any single species, then
such facts would have great weight in making us doubt about the
immutability of the many very closely allied and natural species—for
instance, of the many foxes—inhabiting different quarters of the world.
I do not believe, as we shall presently see, that all our dogs have
descended from any one wild species; but, in the case of some other
domestic races, there is presumptive, or even strong, evidence in
favour of this view.

It has often been assumed that man has chosen for domestication animals
and plants having an extraordinary inherent tendency to vary, and
likewise to withstand diverse climates. I do not dispute that these
capacities have added largely to the value of most of our domesticated
productions; but how could a savage possibly know, when he first tamed
an animal, whether it would vary in succeeding generations, and whether
it would endure other climates? Has the little variability of the ass
or guinea-fowl, or the small power of endurance of warmth by the
rein-deer, or of cold by the common camel, prevented their
domestication? I cannot doubt that if other animals and plants, equal
in number to our domesticated productions, and belonging to equally
diverse classes and countries, were taken from a state of nature, and
could be made to breed for an equal number of generations under
domestication, they would vary on an average as largely as the parent
species of our existing domesticated productions have varied.

In the case of most of our anciently domesticated animals and plants, I
do not think it is possible to come to any definite conclusion, whether
they have descended from one or several species. The argument mainly
relied on by those who believe in the multiple origin
of our domestic animals is, that we find in the most ancient records,
more especially on the monuments of Egypt, much diversity in the
breeds; and that some of the breeds closely resemble, perhaps are
identical with, those still existing. Even if this latter fact were
found more strictly and generally true than seems to me to be the case,
what does it show, but that some of our breeds originated there, four
or five thousand years ago? But Mr. Horner’s researches have rendered
it in some degree probable that man sufficiently civilized to have
manufactured pottery existed in the valley of the Nile thirteen or
fourteen thousand years ago; and who will pretend to say how long
before these ancient periods, savages, like those of Tierra del Fuego
or Australia, who possess a semi-domestic dog, may not have existed in
Egypt?

The whole subject must, I think, remain vague; nevertheless, I may,
without here entering on any details, state that, from geographical and
other considerations, I think it highly probable that our domestic dogs
have descended from several wild species. In regard to sheep and goats
I can form no opinion. I should think, from facts communicated to me by
Mr. Blyth, on the habits, voice, and constitution, etc., of the humped
Indian cattle, that these had descended from a different aboriginal
stock from our European cattle; and several competent judges believe
that these latter have had more than one wild parent. With respect to
horses, from reasons which I cannot give here, I am doubtfully inclined
to believe, in opposition to several authors, that all the races have
descended from one wild stock. Mr. Blyth, whose opinion, from his large
and varied stores of knowledge, I should value more than that of almost
any one, thinks that all the breeds of poultry have proceeded from the
common wild
Indian fowl (Gallus bankiva). In regard to ducks and rabbits, the
breeds of which differ considerably from each other in structure, I do
not doubt that they all have descended from the common wild duck and
rabbit.

The doctrine of the origin of our several domestic races from several
aboriginal stocks, has been carried to an absurd extreme by some
authors. They believe that every race which breeds true, let the
distinctive characters be ever so slight, has had its wild prototype.
At this rate there must have existed at least a score of species of
wild cattle, as many sheep, and several goats in Europe alone, and
several even within Great Britain. One author believes that there
formerly existed in Great Britain eleven wild species of sheep peculiar
to it! When we bear in mind that Britain has now hardly one peculiar
mammal, and France but few distinct from those of Germany and
conversely, and so with Hungary, Spain, etc., but that each of these
kingdoms possesses several peculiar breeds of cattle, sheep, etc., we
must admit that many domestic breeds have originated in Europe; for
whence could they have been derived, as these several countries do not
possess a number of peculiar species as distinct parent-stocks? So it
is in India. Even in the case of the domestic dogs of the whole world,
which I fully admit have probably descended from several wild species,
I cannot doubt that there has been an immense amount of inherited
variation. Who can believe that animals closely resembling the Italian
greyhound, the bloodhound, the bull-dog, or Blenheim spaniel, etc.—so
unlike all wild Canidæ—ever existed freely in a state of nature? It has
often been loosely said that all our races of dogs have been produced
by the crossing of a few aboriginal species; but by crossing we can get
only forms in some degree intermediate between their parents; and if we
account for our several domestic races by this process, we must admit
the former existence of the most extreme forms, as the Italian
greyhound, bloodhound, bull-dog, etc., in the wild state. Moreover, the
possibility of making distinct races by crossing has been greatly
exaggerated. There can be no doubt that a race may be modified by
occasional crosses, if aided by the careful selection of those
individual mongrels, which present any desired character; but that a
race could be obtained nearly intermediate between two extremely
different races or species, I can hardly believe. Sir J. Sebright
expressly experimentised for this object, and failed. The offspring
from the first cross between two pure breeds is tolerably and sometimes
(as I have found with pigeons) extremely uniform, and everything seems
simple enough; but when these mongrels are crossed one with another for
several generations, hardly two of them will be alike, and then the
extreme difficulty, or rather utter hopelessness, of the task becomes
apparent. Certainly, a breed intermediate between _two very distinct_
breeds could not be got without extreme care and long-continued
selection; nor can I find a single case on record of a permanent race
having been thus formed.

_On the Breeds of the Domestic Pigeon_.—Believing that it is always
best to study some special group, I have, after deliberation, taken up
domestic pigeons. I have kept every breed which I could purchase or
obtain, and have been most kindly favoured with skins from several
quarters of the world, more especially by the Honourable W. Elliot from
India, and by the Honourable C. Murray from Persia. Many treatises in
different languages have been published on pigeons, and some of them
are very important, as being of considerable antiquity. I have
associated with several eminent fanciers, and have been permitted to
join two
of the London Pigeon Clubs. The diversity of the breeds is something
astonishing. Compare the English carrier and the short-faced tumbler,
and see the wonderful difference in their beaks, entailing
corresponding differences in their skulls. The carrier, more especially
the male bird, is also remarkable from the wonderful development of the
carunculated skin about the head, and this is accompanied by greatly
elongated eyelids, very large external orifices to the nostrils, and a
wide gape of mouth. The short-faced tumbler has a beak in outline
almost like that of a finch; and the common tumbler has the singular
and strictly inherited habit of flying at a great height in a compact
flock, and tumbling in the air head over heels. The runt is a bird of
great size, with long, massive beak and large feet; some of the
sub-breeds of runts have very long necks, others very long wings and
tails, others singularly short tails. The barb is allied to the
carrier, but, instead of a very long beak, has a very short and very
broad one. The pouter has a much elongated body, wings, and legs; and
its enormously developed crop, which it glories in inflating, may well
excite astonishment and even laughter. The turbit has a very short and
conical beak, with a line of reversed feathers down the breast; and it
has the habit of continually expanding slightly the upper part of the
oesophagus. The Jacobin has the feathers so much reversed along the
back of the neck that they form a hood, and it has, proportionally to
its size, much elongated wing and tail feathers. The trumpeter and
laugher, as their names express, utter a very different coo from the
other breeds. The fantail has thirty or even forty tail-feathers,
instead of twelve or fourteen, the normal number in all members of the
great pigeon family; and these feathers are kept expanded, and are
carried so erect that in good birds the head and tail
touch; the oil-gland is quite aborted. Several other less distinct
breeds might have been specified.

In the skeletons of the several breeds, the development of the bones of
the face in length and breadth and curvature differs enormously. The
shape, as well as the breadth and length of the ramus of the lower jaw,
varies in a highly remarkable manner. The number of the caudal and
sacral vertebræ vary; as does the number of the ribs, together with
their relative breadth and the presence of processes. The size and
shape of the apertures in the sternum are highly variable; so is the
degree of divergence and relative size of the two arms of the furcula.
The proportional width of the gape of mouth, the proportional length of
the eyelids, of the orifice of the nostrils, of the tongue (not always
in strict correlation with the length of beak), the size of the crop
and of the upper part of the oesophagus; the development and abortion
of the oil-gland; the number of the primary wing and caudal feathers;
the relative length of wing and tail to each other and to the body; the
relative length of leg and of the feet; the number of scutellæ on the
toes, the development of skin between the toes, are all points of
structure which are variable. The period at which the perfect plumage
is acquired varies, as does the state of the down with which the
nestling birds are clothed when hatched. The shape and size of the eggs
vary. The manner of flight differs remarkably; as does in some breeds
the voice and disposition. Lastly, in certain breeds, the males and
females have come to differ to a slight degree from each other.

Altogether at least a score of pigeons might be chosen, which if shown
to an ornithologist, and he were told that they were wild birds, would
certainly, I think, be ranked by him as well-defined species. Moreover,
I do not believe that any ornithologist would place touch; the
oil-gland is quite aborted. Several other less distinct breeds might
have been specified.
the English carrier, the short-faced tumbler, the runt, the barb,
pouter, and fantail in the same genus; more especially as in each of
these breeds several truly-inherited sub-breeds, or species as he might
have called them, could be shown him.

Great as the differences are between the breeds of pigeons, I am fully
convinced that the common opinion of naturalists is correct, namely,
that all have descended from the rock-pigeon (Columba livia), including
under this term several geographical races or sub-species, which differ
from each other in the most trifling respects. As several of the
reasons which have led me to this belief are in some degree applicable
in other cases, I will here briefly give them. If the several breeds
are not varieties, and have not proceeded from the rock-pigeon, they
must have descended from at least seven or eight aboriginal stocks; for
it is impossible to make the present domestic breeds by the crossing of
any lesser number: how, for instance, could a pouter be produced by
crossing two breeds unless one of the parent-stocks possessed the
characteristic enormous crop? The supposed aboriginal stocks must all
have been rock-pigeons, that is, not breeding or willingly perching on
trees. But besides C. livia, with its geographical sub-species, only
two or three other species of rock-pigeons are known; and these have
not any of the characters of the domestic breeds. Hence the supposed
aboriginal stocks must either still exist in the countries where they
were originally domesticated, and yet be unknown to ornithologists; and
this, considering their size, habits, and remarkable characters, seems
very improbable; or they must have become extinct in the wild state.
But birds breeding on precipices, and good fliers, are unlikely to be
exterminated; and the common rock-pigeon, which has the same habits
with the domestic breeds, has not been exterminated
even on several of the smaller British islets, or on the shores of the
Mediterranean. Hence the supposed extermination of so many species
having similar habits with the rock-pigeon seems to me a very rash
assumption. Moreover, the several above-named domesticated breeds have
been transported to all parts of the world, and, therefore, some of
them must have been carried back again into their native country; but
not one has ever become wild or feral, though the dovecot-pigeon, which
is the rock-pigeon in a very slightly altered state, has become feral
in several places. Again, all recent experience shows that it is most
difficult to get any wild animal to breed freely under domestication;
yet on the hypothesis of the multiple origin of our pigeons, it must be
assumed that at least seven or eight species were so thoroughly
domesticated in ancient times by half-civilized man, as to be quite
prolific under confinement.

An argument, as it seems to me, of great weight, and applicable in
several other cases, is, that the above-specified breeds, though
agreeing generally in constitution, habits, voice, colouring, and in
most parts of their structure, with the wild rock-pigeon, yet are
certainly highly abnormal in other parts of their structure: we may
look in vain throughout the whole great family of Columbidæ for a beak
like that of the English carrier, or that of the short-faced tumbler,
or barb; for reversed feathers like those of the jacobin; for a crop
like that of the pouter; for tail-feathers like those of the fantail.
Hence it must be assumed not only that half-civilized man succeeded in
thoroughly domesticating several species, but that he intentionally or
by chance picked out extraordinarily abnormal species; and further,
that these very species have since all become extinct or unknown. So
many strange contingencies seem to me improbable in the highest degree.


Some facts in regard to the colouring of pigeons well deserve
consideration. The rock-pigeon is of a slaty-blue, and has a white rump
(the Indian sub-species, C. intermedia of Strickland, having it
bluish); the tail has a terminal dark bar, with the bases of the outer
feathers externally edged with white; the wings have two black bars;
some semi-domestic breeds and some apparently truly wild breeds have,
besides the two black bars, the wings chequered with black. These
several marks do not occur together in any other species of the whole
family. Now, in every one of the domestic breeds, taking thoroughly
well-bred birds, all the above marks, even to the white edging of the
outer tail-feathers, sometimes concur perfectly developed. Moreover,
when two birds belonging to two distinct breeds are crossed, neither of
which is blue or has any of the above-specified marks, the mongrel
offspring are very apt suddenly to acquire these characters; for
instance, I crossed some uniformly white fantails with some uniformly
black barbs, and they produced mottled brown and black birds; these I
again crossed together, and one grandchild of the pure white fantail
and pure black barb was of as beautiful a blue colour, with the white
rump, double black wing-bar, and barred and white-edged tail-feathers,
as any wild rock-pigeon! We can understand these facts, on the
well-known principle of reversion to ancestral characters, if all the
domestic breeds have descended from the rock-pigeon. But if we deny
this, we must make one of the two following highly improbable
suppositions. Either, firstly, that all the several imagined aboriginal
stocks were coloured and marked like the rock-pigeon, although no other
existing species is thus coloured and marked, so that in each separate
breed there might be a tendency to revert to the very same colours and
markings. Or, secondly,
that each breed, even the purest, has within a dozen or, at most,
within a score of generations, been crossed by the rock-pigeon: I say
within a dozen or twenty generations, for we know of no fact
countenancing the belief that the child ever reverts to some one
ancestor, removed by a greater number of generations. In a breed which
has been crossed only once with some distinct breed, the tendency to
reversion to any character derived from such cross will naturally
become less and less, as in each succeeding generation there will be
less of the foreign blood; but when there has been no cross with a
distinct breed, and there is a tendency in both parents to revert to a
character, which has been lost during some former generation, this
tendency, for all that we can see to the contrary, may be transmitted
undiminished for an indefinite number of generations. These two
distinct cases are often confounded in treatises on inheritance.

Lastly, the hybrids or mongrels from between all the domestic breeds of
pigeons are perfectly fertile. I can state this from my own
observations, purposely made on the most distinct breeds. Now, it is
difficult, perhaps impossible, to bring forward one case of the hybrid
offspring of two animals _clearly distinct_ being themselves perfectly
fertile. Some authors believe that long-continued domestication
eliminates this strong tendency to sterility: from the history of the
dog I think there is some probability in this hypothesis, if applied to
species closely related together, though it is unsupported by a single
experiment. But to extend the hypothesis so far as to suppose that
species, aboriginally as distinct as carriers, tumblers, pouters, and
fantails now are, should yield offspring perfectly fertile, _inter se_,
seems to me rash in the extreme.

From these several reasons, namely, the improbability of man having
formerly got seven or eight supposed
species of pigeons to breed freely under domestication; these supposed
species being quite unknown in a wild state, and their becoming nowhere
feral; these species having very abnormal characters in certain
respects, as compared with all other Columbidæ, though so like in most
other respects to the rock-pigeon; the blue colour and various marks
occasionally appearing in all the breeds, both when kept pure and when
crossed; the mongrel offspring being perfectly fertile;—from these
several reasons, taken together, I can feel no doubt that all our
domestic breeds have descended from the Columba livia with its
geographical sub-species.

In favour of this view, I may add, firstly, that C. livia, or the
rock-pigeon, has been found capable of domestication in Europe and in
India; and that it agrees in habits and in a great number of points of
structure with all the domestic breeds. Secondly, although an English
carrier or short-faced tumbler differs immensely in certain characters
from the rock-pigeon, yet by comparing the several sub-breeds of these
breeds, more especially those brought from distant countries, we can
make an almost perfect series between the extremes of structure.
Thirdly, those characters which are mainly distinctive of each breed,
for instance the wattle and length of beak of the carrier, the
shortness of that of the tumbler, and the number of tail-feathers in
the fantail, are in each breed eminently variable; and the explanation
of this fact will be obvious when we come to treat of selection.
Fourthly, pigeons have been watched, and tended with the utmost care,
and loved by many people. They have been domesticated for thousands of
years in several quarters of the world; the earliest known record of
pigeons is in the fifth Aegyptian dynasty, about 3000 B.C., as was
pointed out to me by Professor Lepsius; but Mr. Birch informs me that
pigeons are given in a bill
of fare in the previous dynasty. In the time of the Romans, as we hear
from Pliny, immense prices were given for pigeons; “nay, they are come
to this pass, that they can reckon up their pedigree and race.” Pigeons
were much valued by Akber Khan in India, about the year 1600; never
less than 20,000 pigeons were taken with the court. “The monarchs of
Iran and Turan sent him some very rare birds;” and, continues the
courtly historian, “His Majesty by crossing the breeds, which method
was never practised before, has improved them astonishingly.” About
this same period the Dutch were as eager about pigeons as were the old
Romans. The paramount importance of these considerations in explaining
the immense amount of variation which pigeons have undergone, will be
obvious when we treat of Selection. We shall then, also, see how it is
that the breeds so often have a somewhat monstrous character. It is
also a most favourable circumstance for the production of distinct
breeds, that male and female pigeons can be easily mated for life; and
thus different breeds can be kept together in the same aviary.

I have discussed the probable origin of domestic pigeons at some, yet
quite insufficient, length; because when I first kept pigeons and
watched the several kinds, knowing well how true they bred, I felt
fully as much difficulty in believing that they could ever have
descended from a common parent, as any naturalist could in coming to a
similar conclusion in regard to the many species of finches, or other
large groups of birds, in nature. One circumstance has struck me much;
namely, that all the breeders of the various domestic animals and the
cultivators of plants, with whom I have ever conversed, or whose
treatises I have read, are firmly convinced that the several breeds to
which each has attended, are descended from so many aboriginally
distinct species.
Ask, as I have asked, a celebrated raiser of Hereford cattle, whether
his cattle might not have descended from long horns, and he will laugh
you to scorn. I have never met a pigeon, or poultry, or duck, or rabbit
fancier, who was not fully convinced that each main breed was descended
from a distinct species. Van Mons, in his treatise on pears and apples,
shows how utterly he disbelieves that the several sorts, for instance a
Ribston-pippin or Codlin-apple, could ever have proceeded from the
seeds of the same tree. Innumerable other examples could be given. The
explanation, I think, is simple: from long-continued study they are
strongly impressed with the differences between the several races; and
though they well know that each race varies slightly, for they win
their prizes by selecting such slight differences, yet they ignore all
general arguments, and refuse to sum up in their minds slight
differences accumulated during many successive generations. May not
those naturalists who, knowing far less of the laws of inheritance than
does the breeder, and knowing no more than he does of the intermediate
links in the long lines of descent, yet admit that many of our domestic
races have descended from the same parents—may they not learn a lesson
of caution, when they deride the idea of species in a state of nature
being lineal descendants of other species?

_Selection_.—Let us now briefly consider the steps by which domestic
races have been produced, either from one or from several allied
species. Some little effect may, perhaps, be attributed to the direct
action of the external conditions of life, and some little to habit;
but he would be a bold man who would account by such agencies for the
differences of a dray and race horse, a greyhound and bloodhound, a
carrier and tumbler pigeon. One of the most remarkable features in our
domesticated races
is that we see in them adaptation, not indeed to the animal’s or
plant’s own good, but to man’s use or fancy. Some variations useful to
him have probably arisen suddenly, or by one step; many botanists, for
instance, believe that the fuller’s teazle, with its hooks, which
cannot be rivalled by any mechanical contrivance, is only a variety of
the wild Dipsacus; and this amount of change may have suddenly arisen
in a seedling. So it has probably been with the turnspit dog; and this
is known to have been the case with the ancon sheep. But when we
compare the dray-horse and race-horse, the dromedary and camel, the
various breeds of sheep fitted either for cultivated land or mountain
pasture, with the wool of one breed good for one purpose, and that of
another breed for another purpose; when we compare the many breeds of
dogs, each good for man in very different ways; when we compare the
game-cock, so pertinacious in battle, with other breeds so little
quarrelsome, with “everlasting layers” which never desire to sit, and
with the bantam so small and elegant; when we compare the host of
agricultural, culinary, orchard, and flower-garden races of plants,
most useful to man at different seasons and for different purposes, or
so beautiful in his eyes, we must, I think, look further than to mere
variability. We cannot suppose that all the breeds were suddenly
produced as perfect and as useful as we now see them; indeed, in
several cases, we know that this has not been their history. The key is
man’s power of accumulative selection: nature gives successive
variations; man adds them up in certain directions useful to him. In
this sense he may be said to make for himself useful breeds.

The great power of this principle of selection is not hypothetical. It
is certain that several of our eminent breeders have, even within a
single lifetime, modified to
a large extent some breeds of cattle and sheep. In order fully to
realise what they have done, it is almost necessary to read several of
the many treatises devoted to this subject, and to inspect the animals.
Breeders habitually speak of an animal’s organisation as something
quite plastic, which they can model almost as they please. If I had
space I could quote numerous passages to this effect from highly
competent authorities. Youatt, who was probably better acquainted with
the works of agriculturalists than almost any other individual, and who
was himself a very good judge of an animal, speaks of the principle of
selection as “that which enables the agriculturist, not only to modify
the character of his flock, but to change it altogether. It is the
magician’s wand, by means of which he may summon into life whatever
form and mould he pleases.” Lord Somerville, speaking of what breeders
have done for sheep, says:—“It would seem as if they had chalked out
upon a wall a form perfect in itself, and then had given it existence.”
That most skilful breeder, Sir John Sebright, used to say, with respect
to pigeons, that “he would produce any given feather in three years,
but it would take him six years to obtain head and beak.” In Saxony the
importance of the principle of selection in regard to merino sheep is
so fully recognised, that men follow it as a trade: the sheep are
placed on a table and are studied, like a picture by a connoisseur;
this is done three times at intervals of months, and the sheep are each
time marked and classed, so that the very best may ultimately be
selected for breeding.

What English breeders have actually effected is proved by the enormous
prices given for animals with a good pedigree; and these have now been
exported to almost every quarter of the world. The improvement is by no
means generally due to crossing different breeds;
all the best breeders are strongly opposed to this practice, except
sometimes amongst closely allied sub-breeds. And when a cross has been
made, the closest selection is far more indispensable even than in
ordinary cases. If selection consisted merely in separating some very
distinct variety, and breeding from it, the principle would be so
obvious as hardly to be worth notice; but its importance consists in
the great effect produced by the accumulation in one direction, during
successive generations, of differences absolutely inappreciable by an
uneducated eye—differences which I for one have vainly attempted to
appreciate. Not one man in a thousand has accuracy of eye and judgment
sufficient to become an eminent breeder. If gifted with these
qualities, and he studies his subject for years, and devotes his
lifetime to it with indomitable perseverance, he will succeed, and may
make great improvements; if he wants any of these qualities, he will
assuredly fail. Few would readily believe in the natural capacity and
years of practice requisite to become even a skilful pigeon-fancier.

The same principles are followed by horticulturists; but the variations
are here often more abrupt. No one supposes that our choicest
productions have been produced by a single variation from the
aboriginal stock. We have proofs that this is not so in some cases, in
which exact records have been kept; thus, to give a very trifling
instance, the steadily-increasing size of the common gooseberry may be
quoted. We see an astonishing improvement in many florists’ flowers,
when the flowers of the present day are compared with drawings made
only twenty or thirty years ago. When a race of plants is once pretty
well established, the seed-raisers do not pick out the best plants, but
merely go over their seed-beds, and pull up the “rogues,” as they call
the plants that deviate from the proper standard. With animals this
kind of selection is, in fact, also followed; for hardly any one is so
careless as to allow his worst animals to breed.

In regard to plants, there is another means of observing the
accumulated effects of selection—namely, by comparing the diversity of
flowers in the different varieties of the same species in the
flower-garden; the diversity of leaves, pods, or tubers, or whatever
part is valued, in the kitchen-garden, in comparison with the flowers
of the same varieties; and the diversity of fruit of the same species
in the orchard, in comparison with the leaves and flowers of the same
set of varieties. See how different the leaves of the cabbage are, and
how extremely alike the flowers; how unlike the flowers of the
heartsease are, and how alike the leaves; how much the fruit of the
different kinds of gooseberries differ in size, colour, shape, and
hairiness, and yet the flowers present very slight differences. It is
not that the varieties which differ largely in some one point do not
differ at all in other points; this is hardly ever, perhaps never, the
case. The laws of correlation of growth, the importance of which should
never be overlooked, will ensure some differences; but, as a general
rule, I cannot doubt that the continued selection of slight variations,
either in the leaves, the flowers, or the fruit, will produce races
differing from each other chiefly in these characters.

It may be objected that the principle of selection has been reduced to
methodical practice for scarcely more than three-quarters of a century;
it has certainly been more attended to of late years, and many
treatises have been published on the subject; and the result, I may
add, has been, in a corresponding degree, rapid and important. But it
is very far from true that the principle is a modern discovery. I could
give several references to the full acknowledgment of the importance of
the principle in works of high antiquity. In rude and
barbarous periods of English history choice animals were often
imported, and laws were passed to prevent their exportation: the
destruction of horses under a certain size was ordered, and this may be
compared to the “roguing” of plants by nurserymen. The principle of
selection I find distinctly given in an ancient Chinese encyclopædia.
Explicit rules are laid down by some of the Roman classical writers.
From passages in Genesis, it is clear that the colour of domestic
animals was at that early period attended to. Savages now sometimes
cross their dogs with wild canine animals, to improve the breed, and
they formerly did so, as is attested by passages in Pliny. The savages
in South Africa match their draught cattle by colour, as do some of the
Esquimaux their teams of dogs. Livingstone shows how much good domestic
breeds are valued by the negroes of the interior of Africa who have not
associated with Europeans. Some of these facts do not show actual
selection, but they show that the breeding of domestic animals was
carefully attended to in ancient times, and is now attended to by the
lowest savages. It would, indeed, have been a strange fact, had
attention not been paid to breeding, for the inheritance of good and
bad qualities is so obvious.

At the present time, eminent breeders try by methodical selection, with
a distinct object in view, to make a new strain or sub-breed, superior
to anything existing in the country. But, for our purpose, a kind of
Selection, which may be called Unconscious, and which results from
every one trying to possess and breed from the best individual animals,
is more important. Thus, a man who intends keeping pointers naturally
tries to get as good dogs as he can, and afterwards breeds from his own
best dogs, but he has no wish or expectation of permanently altering
the breed. Nevertheless I cannot
doubt that this process, continued during centuries, would improve and
modify any breed, in the same way as Bakewell, Collins, etc., by this
very same process, only carried on more methodically, did greatly
modify, even during their own lifetimes, the forms and qualities of
their cattle. Slow and insensible changes of this kind could never be
recognised unless actual measurements or careful drawings of the breeds
in question had been made long ago, which might serve for comparison.
In some cases, however, unchanged or but little changed individuals of
the same breed may be found in less civilised districts, where the
breed has been less improved. There is reason to believe that King
Charles’s spaniel has been unconsciously modified to a large extent
since the time of that monarch. Some highly competent authorities are
convinced that the setter is directly derived from the spaniel, and has
probably been slowly altered from it. It is known that the English
pointer has been greatly changed within the last century, and in this
case the change has, it is believed, been chiefly effected by crosses
with the fox-hound; but what concerns us is, that the change has been
effected unconsciously and gradually, and yet so effectually, that,
though the old Spanish pointer certainly came from Spain, Mr. Borrow
has not seen, as I am informed by him, any native dog in Spain like our
pointer.

By a similar process of selection, and by careful training, the whole
body of English racehorses have come to surpass in fleetness and size
the parent Arab stock, so that the latter, by the regulations for the
Goodwood Races, are favoured in the weights they carry. Lord Spencer
and others have shown how the cattle of England have increased in
weight and in early maturity, compared with the stock formerly kept in
this country. By comparing the accounts given in old pigeon treatises
of carriers
and tumblers with these breeds as now existing in Britain, India, and
Persia, we can, I think, clearly trace the stages through which they
have insensibly passed, and come to differ so greatly from the
rock-pigeon.

Youatt gives an excellent illustration of the effects of a course of
selection, which may be considered as unconsciously followed, in so far
that the breeders could never have expected or even have wished to have
produced the result which ensued—namely, the production of two distinct
strains. The two flocks of Leicester sheep kept by Mr. Buckley and Mr.
Burgess, as Mr. Youatt remarks, “have been purely bred from the
original stock of Mr. Bakewell for upwards of fifty years. There is not
a suspicion existing in the mind of any one at all acquainted with the
subject that the owner of either of them has deviated in any one
instance from the pure blood of Mr. Bakewell’s flock, and yet the
difference between the sheep possessed by these two gentlemen is so
great that they have the appearance of being quite different
varieties.”

If there exist savages so barbarous as never to think of the inherited
character of the offspring of their domestic animals, yet any one
animal particularly useful to them, for any special purpose, would be
carefully preserved during famines and other accidents, to which
savages are so liable, and such choice animals would thus generally
leave more offspring than the inferior ones; so that in this case there
would be a kind of unconscious selection going on. We see the value set
on animals even by the barbarians of Tierra del Fuego, by their killing
and devouring their old women, in times of dearth, as of less value
than their dogs.

In plants the same gradual process of improvement, through the
occasional preservation of the best individuals, whether or not
sufficiently distinct to be ranked
at their first appearance as distinct varieties, and whether or not two
or more species or races have become blended together by crossing, may
plainly be recognised in the increased size and beauty which we now see
in the varieties of the heartsease, rose, pelargonium, dahlia, and
other plants, when compared with the older varieties or with their
parent-stocks. No one would ever expect to get a first-rate heartsease
or dahlia from the seed of a wild plant. No one would expect to raise a
first-rate melting pear from the seed of a wild pear, though he might
succeed from a poor seedling growing wild, if it had come from a
garden-stock. The pear, though cultivated in classical times, appears,
from Pliny’s description, to have been a fruit of very inferior
quality. I have seen great surprise expressed in horticultural works at
the wonderful skill of gardeners, in having produced such splendid
results from such poor materials; but the art, I cannot doubt, has been
simple, and, as far as the final result is concerned, has been followed
almost unconsciously. It has consisted in always cultivating the best
known variety, sowing its seeds, and, when a slightly better variety
has chanced to appear, selecting it, and so onwards. But the gardeners
of the classical period, who cultivated the best pear they could
procure, never thought what splendid fruit we should eat; though we owe
our excellent fruit, in some small degree, to their having naturally
chosen and preserved the best varieties they could anywhere find.

A large amount of change in our cultivated plants, thus slowly and
unconsciously accumulated, explains, as I believe, the well-known fact,
that in a vast number of cases we cannot recognise, and therefore do
not know, the wild parent-stocks of the plants which have been longest
cultivated in our flower and kitchen gardens. If it has taken centuries
or thousands of years to improve
or modify most of our plants up to their present standard of usefulness
to man, we can understand how it is that neither Australia, the Cape of
Good Hope, nor any other region inhabited by quite uncivilised man, has
afforded us a single plant worth culture. It is not that these
countries, so rich in species, do not by a strange chance possess the
aboriginal stocks of any useful plants, but that the native plants have
not been improved by continued selection up to a standard of perfection
comparable with that given to the plants in countries anciently
civilised.

In regard to the domestic animals kept by uncivilised man, it should
not be overlooked that they almost always have to struggle for their
own food, at least during certain seasons. And in two countries very
differently circumstanced, individuals of the same species, having
slightly different constitutions or structure, would often succeed
better in the one country than in the other, and thus by a process of
“natural selection,” as will hereafter be more fully explained, two
sub-breeds might be formed. This, perhaps, partly explains what has
been remarked by some authors, namely, that the varieties kept by
savages have more of the character of species than the varieties kept
in civilised countries.

On the view here given of the all-important part which selection by man
has played, it becomes at once obvious, how it is that our domestic
races show adaptation in their structure or in their habits to man’s
wants or fancies. We can, I think, further understand the frequently
abnormal character of our domestic races, and likewise their
differences being so great in external characters and relatively so
slight in internal parts or organs. Man can hardly select, or only with
much difficulty, any deviation of structure excepting such as is
externally visible; and indeed he rarely cares for what is internal. He
can never act by selection, excepting on variations
which are first given to him in some slight degree by nature. No man
would ever try to make a fantail, till he saw a pigeon with a tail
developed in some slight degree in an unusual manner, or a pouter till
he saw a pigeon with a crop of somewhat unusual size; and the more
abnormal or unusual any character was when it first appeared, the more
likely it would be to catch his attention. But to use such an
expression as trying to make a fantail, is, I have no doubt, in most
cases, utterly incorrect. The man who first selected a pigeon with a
slightly larger tail, never dreamed what the descendants of that pigeon
would become through long-continued, partly unconscious and partly
methodical selection. Perhaps the parent bird of all fantails had only
fourteen tail-feathers somewhat expanded, like the present Java
fantail, or like individuals of other and distinct breeds, in which as
many as seventeen tail-feathers have been counted. Perhaps the first
pouter-pigeon did not inflate its crop much more than the turbit now
does the upper part of its oesophagus,—a habit which is disregarded by
all fanciers, as it is not one of the points of the breed.

Nor let it be thought that some great deviation of structure would be
necessary to catch the fancier’s eye: he perceives extremely small
differences, and it is in human nature to value any novelty, however
slight, in one’s own possession. Nor must the value which would
formerly be set on any slight differences in the individuals of the
same species, be judged of by the value which would now be set on them,
after several breeds have once fairly been established. Many slight
differences might, and indeed do now, arise amongst pigeons, which are
rejected as faults or deviations from the standard of perfection of
each breed. The common goose has not given rise to any marked
varieties; hence the Thoulouse and the common breed, which differ only
in colour, that
most fleeting of characters, have lately been exhibited as distinct at
our poultry-shows.

I think these views further explain what has sometimes been
noticed—namely that we know nothing about the origin or history of any
of our domestic breeds. But, in fact, a breed, like a dialect of a
language, can hardly be said to have had a definite origin. A man
preserves and breeds from an individual with some slight deviation of
structure, or takes more care than usual in matching his best animals
and thus improves them, and the improved individuals slowly spread in
the immediate neighbourhood. But as yet they will hardly have a
distinct name, and from being only slightly valued, their history will
be disregarded. When further improved by the same slow and gradual
process, they will spread more widely, and will get recognised as
something distinct and valuable, and will then probably first receive a
provincial name. In semi-civilised countries, with little free
communication, the spreading and knowledge of any new sub-breed will be
a slow process. As soon as the points of value of the new sub-breed are
once fully acknowledged, the principle, as I have called it, of
unconscious selection will always tend,—perhaps more at one period than
at another, as the breed rises or falls in fashion,—perhaps more in one
district than in another, according to the state of civilisation of the
inhabitants—slowly to add to the characteristic features of the breed,
whatever they may be. But the chance will be infinitely small of any
record having been preserved of such slow, varying, and insensible
changes.

I must now say a few words on the circumstances, favourable, or the
reverse, to man’s power of selection. A high degree of variability is
obviously favourable, as freely giving the materials for selection to
work on; not that mere individual differences are not amply
sufficient, with extreme care, to allow of the accumulation of a large
amount of modification in almost any desired direction. But as
variations manifestly useful or pleasing to man appear only
occasionally, the chance of their appearance will be much increased by
a large number of individuals being kept; and hence this comes to be of
the highest importance to success. On this principle Marshall has
remarked, with respect to the sheep of parts of Yorkshire, that “as
they generally belong to poor people, and are mostly _in small lots_,
they never can be improved.” On the other hand, nurserymen, from
raising large stocks of the same plants, are generally far more
successful than amateurs in getting new and valuable varieties. The
keeping of a large number of individuals of a species in any country
requires that the species should be placed under favourable conditions
of life, so as to breed freely in that country. When the individuals of
any species are scanty, all the individuals, whatever their quality may
be, will generally be allowed to breed, and this will effectually
prevent selection. But probably the most important point of all, is,
that the animal or plant should be so highly useful to man, or so much
valued by him, that the closest attention should be paid to even the
slightest deviation in the qualities or structure of each individual.
Unless such attention be paid nothing can be effected. I have seen it
gravely remarked, that it was most fortunate that the strawberry began
to vary just when gardeners began to attend closely to this plant. No
doubt the strawberry had always varied since it was cultivated, but the
slight varieties had been neglected. As soon, however, as gardeners
picked out individual plants with slightly larger, earlier, or better
fruit, and raised seedlings from them, and again picked out the best
seedlings and bred from them, then, there appeared (aided by some
crossing with distinct species) those many admirable varieties of the
strawberry which have been raised during the last thirty or forty
years.

In the case of animals with separate sexes, facility in preventing
crosses is an important element of success in the formation of new
races,—at least, in a country which is already stocked with other
races. In this respect enclosure of the land plays a part. Wandering
savages or the inhabitants of open plains rarely possess more than one
breed of the same species. Pigeons can be mated for life, and this is a
great convenience to the fancier, for thus many races may be kept true,
though mingled in the same aviary; and this circumstance must have
largely favoured the improvement and formation of new breeds. Pigeons,
I may add, can be propagated in great numbers and at a very quick rate,
and inferior birds may be freely rejected, as when killed they serve
for food. On the other hand, cats, from their nocturnal rambling
habits, cannot be matched, and, although so much valued by women and
children, we hardly ever see a distinct breed kept up; such breeds as
we do sometimes see are almost always imported from some other country,
often from islands. Although I do not doubt that some domestic animals
vary less than others, yet the rarity or absence of distinct breeds of
the cat, the donkey, peacock, goose, etc., may be attributed in main
part to selection not having been brought into play: in cats, from the
difficulty in pairing them; in donkeys, from only a few being kept by
poor people, and little attention paid to their breeding; in peacocks,
from not being very easily reared and a large stock not kept; in geese,
from being valuable only for two purposes, food and feathers, and more
especially from no pleasure having been felt in the display of distinct
breeds.


To sum up on the origin of our Domestic Races of animals and plants. I
believe that the conditions of life, from their action on the
reproductive system, are so far of the highest importance as causing
variability. I do not believe that variability is an inherent and
necessary contingency, under all circumstances, with all organic
beings, as some authors have thought. The effects of variability are
modified by various degrees of inheritance and of reversion.
Variability is governed by many unknown laws, more especially by that
of correlation of growth. Something may be attributed to the direct
action of the conditions of life. Something must be attributed to use
and disuse. The final result is thus rendered infinitely complex. In
some cases, I do not doubt that the intercrossing of species,
aboriginally distinct, has played an important part in the origin of
our domestic productions. When in any country several domestic breeds
have once been established, their occasional intercrossing, with the
aid of selection, has, no doubt, largely aided in the formation of new
sub-breeds; but the importance of the crossing of varieties has, I
believe, been greatly exaggerated, both in regard to animals and to
those plants which are propagated by seed. In plants which are
temporarily propagated by cuttings, buds, etc., the importance of the
crossing both of distinct species and of varieties is immense; for the
cultivator here quite disregards the extreme variability both of
hybrids and mongrels, and the frequent sterility of hybrids; but the
cases of plants not propagated by seed are of little importance to us,
for their endurance is only temporary. Over all these causes of Change
I am convinced that the accumulative action of Selection, whether
applied methodically and more quickly, or unconsciously and more
slowly, but more efficiently, is by far the predominant Power.




CHAPTER II.
VARIATION UNDER NATURE.


Variability. Individual differences. Doubtful species. Wide ranging,
much diffused, and common species vary most. Species of the larger
genera in any country vary more than the species of the smaller genera.
Many of the species of the larger genera resemble varieties in being
very closely, but unequally, related to each other, and in having
restricted ranges.

Before applying the principles arrived at in the last chapter to
organic beings in a state of nature, we must briefly discuss whether
these latter are subject to any variation. To treat this subject at all
properly, a long catalogue of dry facts should be given; but these I
shall reserve for my future work. Nor shall I here discuss the various
definitions which have been given of the term species. No one
definition has as yet satisfied all naturalists; yet every naturalist
knows vaguely what he means when he speaks of a species. Generally the
term includes the unknown element of a distinct act of creation. The
term “variety” is almost equally difficult to define; but here
community of descent is almost universally implied, though it can
rarely be proved. We have also what are called monstrosities; but they
graduate into varieties. By a monstrosity I presume is meant some
considerable deviation of structure in one part, either injurious to or
not useful to the species, and not generally propagated. Some authors
use the term “variation” in a technical sense, as implying a
modification directly due to the physical conditions of life; and
“variations” in this sense are supposed not to be inherited: but who
can say that the dwarfed condition of shells in the brackish waters of
the Baltic, or dwarfed plants on Alpine summits, or the thicker fur of
an animal from far northwards, would not in some cases be inherited for
at least some few generations? and in this case I presume that the form
would be called a variety.

Again, we have many slight differences which may be called individual
differences, such as are known frequently to appear in the offspring
from the same parents, or which may be presumed to have thus arisen,
from being frequently observed in the individuals of the same species
inhabiting the same confined locality. No one supposes that all the
individuals of the same species are cast in the very same mould. These
individual differences are highly important for us, as they afford
materials for natural selection to accumulate, in the same manner as
man can accumulate in any given direction individual differences in his
domesticated productions. These individual differences generally affect
what naturalists consider unimportant parts; but I could show by a long
catalogue of facts, that parts which must be called important, whether
viewed under a physiological or classificatory point of view, sometimes
vary in the individuals of the same species. I am convinced that the
most experienced naturalist would be surprised at the number of the
cases of variability, even in important parts of structure, which he
could collect on good authority, as I have collected, during a course
of years. It should be remembered that systematists are far from
pleased at finding variability in important characters, and that there
are not many men who will laboriously examine internal and important
organs, and compare them in many specimens of the same species. I
should never have expected that the branching of the main nerves close
to the great central ganglion of an insect would have been variable in
the same species; I should have expected that changes of this nature
could have been effected only by slow degrees: yet quite recently Mr.
Lubbock has shown a degree of variability in these main nerves in
Coccus, which may almost be compared to the irregular branching of the
stem of a tree. This philosophical naturalist, I may add, has also
quite recently shown that the muscles in the larvæ of certain insects
are very far from uniform. Authors sometimes argue in a circle when
they state that important organs never vary; for these same authors
practically rank that character as important (as some few naturalists
have honestly confessed) which does not vary; and, under this point of
view, no instance of an important part varying will ever be found: but
under any other point of view many instances assuredly can be given.

There is one point connected with individual differences, which seems
to me extremely perplexing: I refer to those genera which have
sometimes been called “protean” or “polymorphic,” in which the species
present an inordinate amount of variation; and hardly two naturalists
can agree which forms to rank as species and which as varieties. We may
instance Rubus, Rosa, and Hieracium amongst plants, several genera of
insects, and several genera of Brachiopod shells. In most polymorphic
genera some of the species have fixed and definite characters. Genera
which are polymorphic in one country seem to be, with some few
exceptions, polymorphic in other countries, and likewise, judging from
Brachiopod shells, at former periods of time. These facts seem to be
very perplexing, for they seem to show that this kind of variability is
independent of the conditions of life. I am inclined to suspect that we
see in these polymorphic genera variations in points of structure which
are of no service or disservice to the species, and which consequently
have not been seized on and rendered definite by natural selection, as
hereafter will be explained.


Those forms which possess in some considerable degree the character of
species, but which are so closely similar to some other forms, or are
so closely linked to them by intermediate gradations, that naturalists
do not like to rank them as distinct species, are in several respects
the most important for us. We have every reason to believe that many of
these doubtful and closely-allied forms have permanently retained their
characters in their own country for a long time; for as long, as far as
we know, as have good and true species. Practically, when a naturalist
can unite two forms together by others having intermediate characters,
he treats the one as a variety of the other, ranking the most common,
but sometimes the one first described, as the species, and the other as
the variety. But cases of great difficulty, which I will not here
enumerate, sometimes occur in deciding whether or not to rank one form
as a variety of another, even when they are closely connected by
intermediate links; nor will the commonly-assumed hybrid nature of the
intermediate links always remove the difficulty. In very many cases,
however, one form is ranked as a variety of another, not because the
intermediate links have actually been found, but because analogy leads
the observer to suppose either that they do now somewhere exist, or may
formerly have existed; and here a wide door for the entry of doubt and
conjecture is opened.

Hence, in determining whether a form should be ranked as a species or a
variety, the opinion of naturalists having sound judgment and wide
experience seems the only guide to follow. We must, however, in many
cases, decide by a majority of naturalists, for few well-marked and
well-known varieties can be named which have not been ranked as species
by at least some competent judges.


That varieties of this doubtful nature are far from uncommon cannot be
disputed. Compare the several floras of Great Britain, of France or of
the United States, drawn up by different botanists, and see what a
surprising number of forms have been ranked by one botanist as good
species, and by another as mere varieties. Mr. H. C. Watson, to whom I
lie under deep obligation for assistance of all kinds, has marked for
me 182 British plants, which are generally considered as varieties, but
which have all been ranked by botanists as species; and in making this
list he has omitted many trifling varieties, but which nevertheless
have been ranked by some botanists as species, and he has entirely
omitted several highly polymorphic genera. Under genera, including the
most polymorphic forms, Mr. Babington gives 251 species, whereas Mr.
Bentham gives only 112,—a difference of 139 doubtful forms! Amongst
animals which unite for each birth, and which are highly locomotive,
doubtful forms, ranked by one zoologist as a species and by another as
a variety, can rarely be found within the same country, but are common
in separated areas. How many of those birds and insects in North
America and Europe, which differ very slightly from each other, have
been ranked by one eminent naturalist as undoubted species, and by
another as varieties, or, as they are often called, as geographical
races! Many years ago, when comparing, and seeing others compare, the
birds from the separate islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, both one
with another, and with those from the American mainland, I was much
struck how entirely vague and arbitrary is the distinction between
species and varieties. On the islets of the little Madeira group there
are many insects which are characterized as varieties in Mr.
Wollaston’s admirable work, but which it cannot
be doubted would be ranked as distinct species by many entomologists.
Even Ireland has a few animals, now generally regarded as varieties,
but which have been ranked as species by some zoologists. Several most
experienced ornithologists consider our British red grouse as only a
strongly-marked race of a Norwegian species, whereas the greater number
rank it as an undoubted species peculiar to Great Britain. A wide
distance between the homes of two doubtful forms leads many naturalists
to rank both as distinct species; but what distance, it has been well
asked, will suffice? if that between America and Europe is ample, will
that between the Continent and the Azores, or Madeira, or the Canaries,
or Ireland, be sufficient? It must be admitted that many forms,
considered by highly-competent judges as varieties, have so perfectly
the character of species that they are ranked by other highly-competent
judges as good and true species. But to discuss whether they are
rightly called species or varieties, before any definition of these
terms has been generally accepted, is vainly to beat the air.

Many of the cases of strongly-marked varieties or doubtful species well
deserve consideration; for several interesting lines of argument, from
geographical distribution, analogical variation, hybridism, etc., have
been brought to bear on the attempt to determine their rank. I will
here give only a single instance,—the well-known one of the primrose
and cowslip, or Primula veris and elatior. These plants differ
considerably in appearance; they have a different flavour and emit a
different odour; they flower at slightly different periods; they grow
in somewhat different stations; they ascend mountains to different
heights; they have different geographical ranges; and lastly, according
to very numerous experiments made during several years by
that most careful observer Gärtner, they can be crossed only with much
difficulty. We could hardly wish for better evidence of the two forms
being specifically distinct. On the other hand, they are united by many
intermediate links, and it is very doubtful whether these links are
hybrids; and there is, as it seems to me, an overwhelming amount of
experimental evidence, showing that they descend from common parents,
and consequently must be ranked as varieties.

Close investigation, in most cases, will bring naturalists to an
agreement how to rank doubtful forms. Yet it must be confessed, that it
is in the best-known countries that we find the greatest number of
forms of doubtful value. I have been struck with the fact, that if any
animal or plant in a state of nature be highly useful to man, or from
any cause closely attract his attention, varieties of it will almost
universally be found recorded. These varieties, moreover, will be often
ranked by some authors as species. Look at the common oak, how closely
it has been studied; yet a German author makes more than a dozen
species out of forms, which are very generally considered as varieties;
and in this country the highest botanical authorities and practical men
can be quoted to show that the sessile and pedunculated oaks are either
good and distinct species or mere varieties.

When a young naturalist commences the study of a group of organisms
quite unknown to him, he is at first much perplexed to determine what
differences to consider as specific, and what as varieties; for he
knows nothing of the amount and kind of variation to which the group is
subject; and this shows, at least, how very generally there is some
variation. But if he confine his attention to one class within one
country, he will soon make up his mind how to rank most of the doubtful
forms. His
general tendency will be to make many species, for he will become
impressed, just like the pigeon or poultry-fancier before alluded to,
with the amount of difference in the forms which he is continually
studying; and he has little general knowledge of analogical variation
in other groups and in other countries, by which to correct his first
impressions. As he extends the range of his observations, he will meet
with more cases of difficulty; for he will encounter a greater number
of closely-allied forms. But if his observations be widely extended, he
will in the end generally be enabled to make up his own mind which to
call varieties and which species; but he will succeed in this at the
expense of admitting much variation,—and the truth of this admission
will often be disputed by other naturalists. When, moreover, he comes
to study allied forms brought from countries not now continuous, in
which case he can hardly hope to find the intermediate links between
his doubtful forms, he will have to trust almost entirely to analogy,
and his difficulties will rise to a climax.

Certainly no clear line of demarcation has as yet been drawn between
species and sub-species—that is, the forms which in the opinion of some
naturalists come very near to, but do not quite arrive at the rank of
species; or, again, between sub-species and well-marked varieties, or
between lesser varieties and individual differences. These differences
blend into each other in an insensible series; and a series impresses
the mind with the idea of an actual passage.

Hence I look at individual differences, though of small interest to the
systematist, as of high importance for us, as being the first step
towards such slight varieties as are barely thought worth recording in
works on natural history. And I look at varieties which are in any
degree more distinct and permanent, as steps leading to more
strongly marked and more permanent varieties; and at these latter, as
leading to sub-species, and to species. The passage from one stage of
difference to another and higher stage may be, in some cases, due
merely to the long-continued action of different physical conditions in
two different regions; but I have not much faith in this view; and I
attribute the passage of a variety, from a state in which it differs
very slightly from its parent to one in which it differs more, to the
action of natural selection in accumulating (as will hereafter be more
fully explained) differences of structure in certain definite
directions. Hence I believe a well-marked variety may be justly called
an incipient species; but whether this belief be justifiable must be
judged of by the general weight of the several facts and views given
throughout this work.

It need not be supposed that all varieties or incipient species
necessarily attain the rank of species. They may whilst in this
incipient state become extinct, or they may endure as varieties for
very long periods, as has been shown to be the case by Mr. Wollaston
with the varieties of certain fossil land-shells in Madeira. If a
variety were to flourish so as to exceed in numbers the parent species,
it would then rank as the species, and the species as the variety; or
it might come to supplant and exterminate the parent species; or both
might co-exist, and both rank as independent species. But we shall
hereafter have to return to this subject.

From these remarks it will be seen that I look at the term species, as
one arbitrarily given for the sake of convenience to a set of
individuals closely resembling each other, and that it does not
essentially differ from the term variety, which is given to less
distinct and more fluctuating forms. The term variety, again, in
comparison with mere individual differences, is also applied
arbitrarily, and for mere convenience sake.


Guided by theoretical considerations, I thought that some interesting
results might be obtained in regard to the nature and relations of the
species which vary most, by tabulating all the varieties in several
well-worked floras. At first this seemed a simple task; but Mr. H. C.
Watson, to whom I am much indebted for valuable advice and assistance
on this subject, soon convinced me that there were many difficulties,
as did subsequently Dr. Hooker, even in stronger terms. I shall reserve
for my future work the discussion of these difficulties, and the tables
themselves of the proportional numbers of the varying species. Dr.
Hooker permits me to add, that after having carefully read my
manuscript, and examined the tables, he thinks that the following
statements are fairly well established. The whole subject, however,
treated as it necessarily here is with much brevity, is rather
perplexing, and allusions cannot be avoided to the “struggle for
existence,” “divergence of character,” and other questions, hereafter
to be discussed.

Alph. De Candolle and others have shown that plants which have very
wide ranges generally present varieties; and this might have been
expected, as they become exposed to diverse physical conditions, and as
they come into competition (which, as we shall hereafter see, is a far
more important circumstance) with different sets of organic beings. But
my tables further show that, in any limited country, the species which
are most common, that is abound most in individuals, and the species
which are most widely diffused within their own country (and this is a
different consideration from wide range, and to a certain extent from
commonness), often give rise to varieties sufficiently well-marked to
have been recorded in botanical works. Hence it is the most
flourishing, or, as they may be called, the dominant species,—those
which range widely over the world, are the most diffused in their own
country, and are the most numerous in individuals,—which oftenest
produce well-marked varieties, or, as I consider them, incipient
species. And this, perhaps, might have been anticipated; for, as
varieties, in order to become in any degree permanent, necessarily have
to struggle with the other inhabitants of the country, the species
which are already dominant will be the most likely to yield offspring
which, though in some slight degree modified, will still inherit those
advantages that enabled their parents to become dominant over their
compatriots.

If the plants inhabiting a country and described in any Flora be
divided into two equal masses, all those in the larger genera being
placed on one side, and all those in the smaller genera on the other
side, a somewhat larger number of the very common and much diffused or
dominant species will be found on the side of the larger genera. This,
again, might have been anticipated; for the mere fact of many species
of the same genus inhabiting any country, shows that there is something
in the organic or inorganic conditions of that country favourable to
the genus; and, consequently, we might have expected to have found in
the larger genera, or those including many species, a large
proportional number of dominant species. But so many causes tend to
obscure this result, that I am surprised that my tables show even a
small majority on the side of the larger genera. I will here allude to
only two causes of obscurity. Fresh-water and salt-loving plants have
generally very wide ranges and are much diffused, but this seems to be
connected with the nature of the stations inhabited by them, and has
little or no relation to the size of the genera to which the species
belong. Again, plants low in the scale of organisation are
generally much more widely diffused than plants higher in the scale;
and here again there is no close relation to the size of the genera.
The cause of lowly-organised plants ranging widely will be discussed in
our chapter on geographical distribution.

From looking at species as only strongly-marked and well-defined
varieties, I was led to anticipate that the species of the larger
genera in each country would oftener present varieties, than the
species of the smaller genera; for wherever many closely related
species (_i.e._ species of the same genus) have been formed, many
varieties or incipient species ought, as a general rule, to be now
forming. Where many large trees grow, we expect to find saplings. Where
many species of a genus have been formed through variation,
circumstances have been favourable for variation; and hence we might
expect that the circumstances would generally be still favourable to
variation. On the other hand, if we look at each species as a special
act of creation, there is no apparent reason why more varieties should
occur in a group having many species, than in one having few.

To test the truth of this anticipation I have arranged the plants of
twelve countries, and the coleopterous insects of two districts, into
two nearly equal masses, the species of the larger genera on one side,
and those of the smaller genera on the other side, and it has
invariably proved to be the case that a larger proportion of the
species on the side of the larger genera present varieties, than on the
side of the smaller genera. Moreover, the species of the large genera
which present any varieties, invariably present a larger average number
of varieties than do the species of the small genera. Both these
results follow when another division is made, and when all the smallest
genera, with from only one to four species, are absolutely excluded
from the tables. These
facts are of plain signification on the view that species are only
strongly marked and permanent varieties; for wherever many species of
the same genus have been formed, or where, if we may use the
expression, the manufactory of species has been active, we ought
generally to find the manufactory still in action, more especially as
we have every reason to believe the process of manufacturing new
species to be a slow one. And this certainly is the case, if varieties
be looked at as incipient species; for my tables clearly show as a
general rule that, wherever many species of a genus have been formed,
the species of that genus present a number of varieties, that is of
incipient species, beyond the average. It is not that all large genera
are now varying much, and are thus increasing in the number of their
species, or that no small genera are now varying and increasing; for if
this had been so, it would have been fatal to my theory; inasmuch as
geology plainly tells us that small genera have in the lapse of time
often increased greatly in size; and that large genera have often come
to their maxima, declined, and disappeared. All that we want to show
is, that where many species of a genus have been formed, on an average
many are still forming; and this holds good.

There are other relations between the species of large genera and their
recorded varieties which deserve notice. We have seen that there is no
infallible criterion by which to distinguish species and well-marked
varieties; and in those cases in which intermediate links have not been
found between doubtful forms, naturalists are compelled to come to a
determination by the amount of difference between them, judging by
analogy whether or not the amount suffices to raise one or both to the
rank of species. Hence the amount of difference is one very important
criterion in settling whether two forms should
be ranked as species or varieties. Now Fries has remarked in regard to
plants, and Westwood in regard to insects, that in large genera the
amount of difference between the species is often exceedingly small. I
have endeavoured to test this numerically by averages, and, as far as
my imperfect results go, they always confirm the view. I have also
consulted some sagacious and most experienced observers, and, after
deliberation, they concur in this view. In this respect, therefore, the
species of the larger genera resemble varieties, more than do the
species of the smaller genera. Or the case may be put in another way,
and it may be said, that in the larger genera, in which a number of
varieties or incipient species greater than the average are now
manufacturing, many of the species already manufactured still to a
certain extent resemble varieties, for they differ from each other by a
less than usual amount of difference.

Moreover, the species of the large genera are related to each other, in
the same manner as the varieties of any one species are related to each
other. No naturalist pretends that all the species of a genus are
equally distinct from each other; they may generally be divided into
sub-genera, or sections, or lesser groups. As Fries has well remarked,
little groups of species are generally clustered like satellites around
certain other species. And what are varieties but groups of forms,
unequally related to each other, and clustered round certain forms—that
is, round their parent-species? Undoubtedly there is one most important
point of difference between varieties and species; namely, that the
amount of difference between varieties, when compared with each other
or with their parent-species, is much less than that between the
species of the same genus. But when we come to discuss the principle,
as I call it, of Divergence of Character,
we shall see how this may be explained, and how the lesser differences
between varieties will tend to increase into the greater differences
between species.

There is one other point which seems to me worth notice. Varieties
generally have much restricted ranges: this statement is indeed
scarcely more than a truism, for if a variety were found to have a
wider range than that of its supposed parent-species, their
denominations ought to be reversed. But there is also reason to
believe, that those species which are very closely allied to other
species, and in so far resemble varieties, often have much restricted
ranges. For instance, Mr. H. C. Watson has marked for me in the
well-sifted London Catalogue of plants (4th edition) 63 plants which
are therein ranked as species, but which he considers as so closely
allied to other species as to be of doubtful value: these 63 reputed
species range on an average over 6.9 of the provinces into which Mr.
Watson has divided Great Britain. Now, in this same catalogue, 53
acknowledged varieties are recorded, and these range over 7.7
provinces; whereas, the species to which these varieties belong range
over 14.3 provinces. So that the acknowledged varieties have very
nearly the same restricted average range, as have those very closely
allied forms, marked for me by Mr. Watson as doubtful species, but
which are almost universally ranked by British botanists as good and
true species.

Finally, then, varieties have the same general characters as species,
for they cannot be distinguished from species,—except, firstly, by the
discovery of intermediate linking forms, and the occurrence of such
links cannot affect the actual characters of the forms which they
connect; and except, secondly, by a certain amount of
difference, for two forms, if differing very little, are generally
ranked as varieties, notwithstanding that intermediate linking forms
have not been discovered; but the amount of difference considered
necessary to give to two forms the rank of species is quite indefinite.
In genera having more than the average number of species in any
country, the species of these genera have more than the average number
of varieties. In large genera the species are apt to be closely, but
unequally, allied together, forming little clusters round certain
species. Species very closely allied to other species apparently have
restricted ranges. In all these several respects the species of large
genera present a strong analogy with varieties. And we can clearly
understand these analogies, if species have once existed as varieties,
and have thus originated: whereas, these analogies are utterly
inexplicable if each species has been independently created.

We have, also, seen that it is the most flourishing and dominant
species of the larger genera which on an average vary most; and
varieties, as we shall hereafter see, tend to become converted into new
and distinct species. The larger genera thus tend to become larger; and
throughout nature the forms of life which are now dominant tend to
become still more dominant by leaving many modified and dominant
descendants. But by steps hereafter to be explained, the larger genera
also tend to break up into smaller genera. And thus, the forms of life
throughout the universe become divided into groups subordinate to
groups.




CHAPTER III.
STRUGGLE FOR EXISTENCE.


Bears on natural selection. The term used in a wide sense. Geometrical
powers of increase. Rapid increase of naturalised animals and plants.
Nature of the checks to increase. Competition universal. Effects of
climate. Protection from the number of individuals. Complex relations
of all animals and plants throughout nature. Struggle for life most
severe between individuals and varieties of the same species; often
severe between species of the same genus. The relation of organism to
organism the most important of all relations.


Before entering on the subject of this chapter, I must make a few
preliminary remarks, to show how the struggle for existence bears on
Natural Selection. It has been seen in the last chapter that amongst
organic beings in a state of nature there is some individual
variability; indeed I am not aware that this has ever been disputed. It
is immaterial for us whether a multitude of doubtful forms be called
species or sub-species or varieties; what rank, for instance, the two
or three hundred doubtful forms of British plants are entitled to hold,
if the existence of any well-marked varieties be admitted. But the mere
existence of individual variability and of some few well-marked
varieties, though necessary as the foundation for the work, helps us
but little in understanding how species arise in nature. How have all
those exquisite adaptations of one part of the organisation to another
part, and to the conditions of life, and of one distinct organic being
to another being, been perfected? We see these beautiful co-adaptations
most plainly in the woodpecker and missletoe; and only a little less
plainly in the humblest parasite which clings
to the hairs of a quadruped or feathers of a bird; in the structure of
the beetle which dives through the water; in the plumed seed which is
wafted by the gentlest breeze; in short, we see beautiful adaptations
everywhere and in every part of the organic world.

Again, it may be asked, how is it that varieties, which I have called
incipient species, become ultimately converted into good and distinct
species, which in most cases obviously differ from each other far more
than do the varieties of the same species? How do those groups of
species, which constitute what are called distinct genera, and which
differ from each other more than do the species of the same genus,
arise? All these results, as we shall more fully see in the next
chapter, follow inevitably from the struggle for life. Owing to this
struggle for life, any variation, however slight and from whatever
cause proceeding, if it be in any degree profitable to an individual of
any species, in its infinitely complex relations to other organic
beings and to external nature, will tend to the preservation of that
individual, and will generally be inherited by its offspring. The
offspring, also, will thus have a better chance of surviving, for, of
the many individuals of any species which are periodically born, but a
small number can survive. I have called this principle, by which each
slight variation, if useful, is preserved, by the term of Natural
Selection, in order to mark its relation to man’s power of selection.
We have seen that man by selection can certainly produce great results,
and can adapt organic beings to his own uses, through the accumulation
of slight but useful variations, given to him by the hand of Nature.
But Natural Selection, as we shall hereafter see, is a power
incessantly ready for action, and is as immeasurably superior to man’s
feeble efforts, as the works of Nature are to those of Art.


We will now discuss in a little more detail the struggle for existence.
In my future work this subject shall be treated, as it well deserves,
at much greater length. The elder De Candolle and Lyell have largely
and philosophically shown that all organic beings are exposed to severe
competition. In regard to plants, no one has treated this subject with
more spirit and ability than W. Herbert, Dean of Manchester, evidently
the result of his great horticultural knowledge. Nothing is easier than
to admit in words the truth of the universal struggle for life, or more
difficult—at least I have found it so—than constantly to bear this
conclusion in mind. Yet unless it be thoroughly engrained in the mind,
I am convinced that the whole economy of nature, with every fact on
distribution, rarity, abundance, extinction, and variation, will be
dimly seen or quite misunderstood. We behold the face of nature bright
with gladness, we often see superabundance of food; we do not see, or
we forget, that the birds which are idly singing round us mostly live
on insects or seeds, and are thus constantly destroying life; or we
forget how largely these songsters, or their eggs, or their nestlings,
are destroyed by birds and beasts of prey; we do not always bear in
mind, that though food may be now superabundant, it is not so at all
seasons of each recurring year.

I should premise that I use the term Struggle for Existence in a large
and metaphorical sense, including dependence of one being on another,
and including (which is more important) not only the life of the
individual, but success in leaving progeny. Two canine animals in a
time of dearth, may be truly said to struggle with each other which
shall get food and live. But a plant on the edge of a desert is said to
struggle for life against the drought, though more properly it should
be said to be dependent on the moisture. A
plant which annually produces a thousand seeds, of which on an average
only one comes to maturity, may be more truly said to struggle with the
plants of the same and other kinds which already clothe the ground. The
missletoe is dependent on the apple and a few other trees, but can only
in a far-fetched sense be said to struggle with these trees, for if too
many of these parasites grow on the same tree, it will languish and
die. But several seedling missletoes, growing close together on the
same branch, may more truly be said to struggle with each other. As the
missletoe is disseminated by birds, its existence depends on birds; and
it may metaphorically be said to struggle with other fruit-bearing
plants, in order to tempt birds to devour and thus disseminate its
seeds rather than those of other plants. In these several senses, which
pass into each other, I use for convenience sake the general term of
struggle for existence.

A struggle for existence inevitably follows from the high rate at which
all organic beings tend to increase. Every being, which during its
natural lifetime produces several eggs or seeds, must suffer
destruction during some period of its life, and during some season or
occasional year, otherwise, on the principle of geometrical increase,
its numbers would quickly become so inordinately great that no country
could support the product. Hence, as more individuals are produced than
can possibly survive, there must in every case be a struggle for
existence, either one individual with another of the same species, or
with the individuals of distinct species, or with the physical
conditions of life. It is the doctrine of Malthus applied with manifold
force to the whole animal and vegetable kingdoms; for in this case
there can be no artificial increase of food, and no prudential
restraint from marriage. Although some species may be
now increasing, more or less rapidly, in numbers, all cannot do so, for
the world would not hold them.

There is no exception to the rule that every organic being naturally
increases at so high a rate, that if not destroyed, the earth would
soon be covered by the progeny of a single pair. Even slow-breeding man
has doubled in twenty-five years, and at this rate, in a few thousand
years, there would literally not be standing room for his progeny.
Linnæus has calculated that if an annual plant produced only two
seeds—and there is no plant so unproductive as this—and their seedlings
next year produced two, and so on, then in twenty years there would be
a million plants. The elephant is reckoned to be the slowest breeder of
all known animals, and I have taken some pains to estimate its probable
minimum rate of natural increase: it will be under the mark to assume
that it breeds when thirty years old, and goes on breeding till ninety
years old, bringing forth three pair of young in this interval; if this
be so, at the end of the fifth century there would be alive fifteen
million elephants, descended from the first pair.

But we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical
calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly
rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when
circumstances have been favourable to them during two or three
following seasons. Still more striking is the evidence from our
domestic animals of many kinds which have run wild in several parts of
the world: if the statements of the rate of increase of slow-breeding
cattle and horses in South America, and latterly in Australia, had not
been well authenticated, they would have been quite incredible. So it
is with plants: cases could be given of introduced plants which have
become common throughout whole islands in a period of less than ten
years. Several
of the plants now most numerous over the wide plains of La Plata,
clothing square leagues of surface almost to the exclusion of all other
plants, have been introduced from Europe; and there are plants which
now range in India, as I hear from Dr. Falconer, from Cape Comorin to
the Himalaya, which have been imported from America since its
discovery. In such cases, and endless instances could be given, no one
supposes that the fertility of these animals or plants has been
suddenly and temporarily increased in any sensible degree. The obvious
explanation is that the conditions of life have been very favourable,
and that there has consequently been less destruction of the old and
young, and that nearly all the young have been enabled to breed. In
such cases the geometrical ratio of increase, the result of which never
fails to be surprising, simply explains the extraordinarily rapid
increase and wide diffusion of naturalised productions in their new
homes.

In a state of nature almost every plant produces seed, and amongst
animals there are very few which do not annually pair. Hence we may
confidently assert, that all plants and animals are tending to increase
at a geometrical ratio, that all would most rapidly stock every station
in which they could any how exist, and that the geometrical tendency to
increase must be checked by destruction at some period of life. Our
familiarity with the larger domestic animals tends, I think, to mislead
us: we see no great destruction falling on them, and we forget that
thousands are annually slaughtered for food, and that in a state of
nature an equal number would have somehow to be disposed of.

The only difference between organisms which annually produce eggs or
seeds by the thousand, and those which produce extremely few, is, that
the slow-breeders would require a few more years to people, under
favourable
conditions, a whole district, let it be ever so large. The condor lays
a couple of eggs and the ostrich a score, and yet in the same country
the condor may be the more numerous of the two: the Fulmar petrel lays
but one egg, yet it is believed to be the most numerous bird in the
world. One fly deposits hundreds of eggs, and another, like the
hippobosca, a single one; but this difference does not determine how
many individuals of the two species can be supported in a district. A
large number of eggs is of some importance to those species, which
depend on a rapidly fluctuating amount of food, for it allows them
rapidly to increase in number. But the real importance of a large
number of eggs or seeds is to make up for much destruction at some
period of life; and this period in the great majority of cases is an
early one. If an animal can in any way protect its own eggs or young, a
small number may be produced, and yet the average stock be fully kept
up; but if many eggs or young are destroyed, many must be produced, or
the species will become extinct. It would suffice to keep up the full
number of a tree, which lived on an average for a thousand years, if a
single seed were produced once in a thousand years, supposing that this
seed were never destroyed, and could be ensured to germinate in a
fitting place. So that in all cases, the average number of any animal
or plant depends only indirectly on the number of its eggs or seeds.

In looking at Nature, it is most necessary to keep the foregoing
considerations always in mind—never to forget that every single organic
being around us may be said to be striving to the utmost to increase in
numbers; that each lives by a struggle at some period of its life; that
heavy destruction inevitably falls either on the young or old, during
each generation or at recurrent intervals. Lighten any check, mitigate
the
destruction ever so little, and the number of the species will almost
instantaneously increase to any amount. The face of Nature may be
compared to a yielding surface, with ten thousand sharp wedges packed
close together and driven inwards by incessant blows, sometimes one
wedge being struck, and then another with greater force.

What checks the natural tendency of each species to increase in number
is most obscure. Look at the most vigorous species; by as much as it
swarms in numbers, by so much will its tendency to increase be still
further increased. We know not exactly what the checks are in even one
single instance. Nor will this surprise any one who reflects how
ignorant we are on this head, even in regard to mankind, so
incomparably better known than any other animal. This subject has been
ably treated by several authors, and I shall, in my future work,
discuss some of the checks at considerable length, more especially in
regard to the feral animals of South America. Here I will make only a
few remarks, just to recall to the reader’s mind some of the chief
points. Eggs or very young animals seem generally to suffer most, but
this is not invariably the case. With plants there is a vast
destruction of seeds, but, from some observations which I have made, I
believe that it is the seedlings which suffer most from germinating in
ground already thickly stocked with other plants. Seedlings, also, are
destroyed in vast numbers by various enemies; for instance, on a piece
of ground three feet long and two wide, dug and cleared, and where
there could be no choking from other plants, I marked all the seedlings
of our native weeds as they came up, and out of the 357 no less than
295 were destroyed, chiefly by slugs and insects. If turf which has
long been mown, and the case would be the same with turf closely
browsed by quadrupeds, be let to grow,
the more vigorous plants gradually kill the less vigorous, though fully
grown, plants: thus out of twenty species growing on a little plot of
turf (three feet by four) nine species perished from the other species
being allowed to grow up freely.

The amount of food for each species of course gives the extreme limit
to which each can increase; but very frequently it is not the obtaining
food, but the serving as prey to other animals, which determines the
average numbers of a species. Thus, there seems to be little doubt that
the stock of partridges, grouse, and hares on any large estate depends
chiefly on the destruction of vermin. If not one head of game were shot
during the next twenty years in England, and, at the same time, if no
vermin were destroyed, there would, in all probability, be less game
than at present, although hundreds of thousands of game animals are now
annually killed. On the other hand, in some cases, as with the elephant
and rhinoceros, none are destroyed by beasts of prey: even the tiger in
India most rarely dares to attack a young elephant protected by its
dam.

Climate plays an important part in determining the average numbers of a
species, and periodical seasons of extreme cold or drought, I believe
to be the most effective of all checks. I estimated that the winter of
1854-55 destroyed four-fifths of the birds in my own grounds; and this
is a tremendous destruction, when we remember that ten per cent. is an
extraordinarily severe mortality from epidemics with man. The action of
climate seems at first sight to be quite independent of the struggle
for existence; but in so far as climate chiefly acts in reducing food,
it brings on the most severe struggle between the individuals, whether
of the same or of distinct species, which subsist on the same kind of
food. Even when climate, for instance extreme
cold, acts directly, it will be the least vigorous, or those which have
got least food through the advancing winter, which will suffer most.
When we travel from south to north, or from a damp region to a dry, we
invariably see some species gradually getting rarer and rarer, and
finally disappearing; and the change of climate being conspicuous, we
are tempted to attribute the whole effect to its direct action. But
this is a very false view: we forget that each species, even where it
most abounds, is constantly suffering enormous destruction at some
period of its life, from enemies or from competitors for the same place
and food; and if these enemies or competitors be in the least degree
favoured by any slight change of climate, they will increase in
numbers, and, as each area is already fully stocked with inhabitants,
the other species will decrease. When we travel southward and see a
species decreasing in numbers, we may feel sure that the cause lies
quite as much in other species being favoured, as in this one being
hurt. So it is when we travel northward, but in a somewhat lesser
degree, for the number of species of all kinds, and therefore of
competitors, decreases northwards; hence in going northward, or in
ascending a mountain, we far oftener meet with stunted forms, due to
the _directly_ injurious action of climate, than we do in proceeding
southwards or in descending a mountain. When we reach the Arctic
regions, or snow-capped summits, or absolute deserts, the struggle for
life is almost exclusively with the elements.

That climate acts in main part indirectly by favouring other species,
we may clearly see in the prodigious number of plants in our gardens
which can perfectly well endure our climate, but which never become
naturalised, for they cannot compete with our native plants, nor resist
destruction by our native animals.


When a species, owing to highly favourable circumstances, increases
inordinately in numbers in a small tract, epidemics—at least, this
seems generally to occur with our game animals—often ensue: and here we
have a limiting check independent of the struggle for life. But even
some of these so-called epidemics appear to be due to parasitic worms,
which have from some cause, possibly in part through facility of
diffusion amongst the crowded animals, been disproportionably favoured:
and here comes in a sort of struggle between the parasite and its prey.

On the other hand, in many cases, a large stock of individuals of the
same species, relatively to the numbers of its enemies, is absolutely
necessary for its preservation. Thus we can easily raise plenty of corn
and rape-seed, etc., in our fields, because the seeds are in great
excess compared with the number of birds which feed on them; nor can
the birds, though having a superabundance of food at this one season,
increase in number proportionally to the supply of seed, as their
numbers are checked during winter: but any one who has tried, knows how
troublesome it is to get seed from a few wheat or other such plants in
a garden; I have in this case lost every single seed. This view of the
necessity of a large stock of the same species for its preservation,
explains, I believe, some singular facts in nature, such as that of
very rare plants being sometimes extremely abundant in the few spots
where they do occur; and that of some social plants being social, that
is, abounding in individuals, even on the extreme confines of their
range. For in such cases, we may believe, that a plant could exist only
where the conditions of its life were so favourable that many could
exist together, and thus save each other from utter destruction. I
should add that the good effects of frequent intercrossing, and the ill
effects
of close interbreeding, probably come into play in some of these cases;
but on this intricate subject I will not here enlarge.

Many cases are on record showing how complex and unexpected are the
checks and relations between organic beings, which have to struggle
together in the same country. I will give only a single instance,
which, though a simple one, has interested me. In Staffordshire, on the
estate of a relation where I had ample means of investigation, there
was a large and extremely barren heath, which had never been touched by
the hand of man; but several hundred acres of exactly the same nature
had been enclosed twenty-five years previously and planted with Scotch
fir. The change in the native vegetation of the planted part of the
heath was most remarkable, more than is generally seen in passing from
one quite different soil to another: not only the proportional numbers
of the heath-plants were wholly changed, but twelve species of plants
(not counting grasses and carices) flourished in the plantations, which
could not be found on the heath. The effect on the insects must have
been still greater, for six insectivorous birds were very common in the
plantations, which were not to be seen on the heath; and the heath was
frequented by two or three distinct insectivorous birds. Here we see
how potent has been the effect of the introduction of a single tree,
nothing whatever else having been done, with the exception that the
land had been enclosed, so that cattle could not enter. But how
important an element enclosure is, I plainly saw near Farnham, in
Surrey. Here there are extensive heaths, with a few clumps of old
Scotch firs on the distant hill-tops: within the last ten years large
spaces have been enclosed, and self-sown firs are now springing up in
multitudes, so close together that all cannot live.
When I ascertained that these young trees had not been sown or planted,
I was so much surprised at their numbers that I went to several points
of view, whence I could examine hundreds of acres of the unenclosed
heath, and literally I could not see a single Scotch fir, except the
old planted clumps. But on looking closely between the stems of the
heath, I found a multitude of seedlings and little trees, which had
been perpetually browsed down by the cattle. In one square yard, at a
point some hundred yards distant from one of the old clumps, I counted
thirty-two little trees; and one of them, judging from the rings of
growth, had during twenty-six years tried to raise its head above the
stems of the heath, and had failed. No wonder that, as soon as the land
was enclosed, it became thickly clothed with vigorously growing young
firs. Yet the heath was so extremely barren and so extensive that no
one would ever have imagined that cattle would have so closely and
effectually searched it for food.

Here we see that cattle absolutely determine the existence of the
Scotch fir; but in several parts of the world insects determine the
existence of cattle. Perhaps Paraguay offers the most curious instance
of this; for here neither cattle nor horses nor dogs have ever run
wild, though they swarm southward and northward in a feral state; and
Azara and Rengger have shown that this is caused by the greater number
in Paraguay of a certain fly, which lays its eggs in the navels of
these animals when first born. The increase of these flies, numerous as
they are, must be habitually checked by some means, probably by birds.
Hence, if certain insectivorous birds (whose numbers are probably
regulated by hawks or beasts of prey) were to increase in Paraguay, the
flies would decrease—then cattle and horses would become feral, and
this would certainly greatly alter (as
indeed I have observed in parts of South America) the vegetation: this
again would largely affect the insects; and this, as we just have seen
in Staffordshire, the insectivorous birds, and so onwards in
ever-increasing circles of complexity. We began this series by
insectivorous birds, and we have ended with them. Not that in nature
the relations can ever be as simple as this. Battle within battle must
ever be recurring with varying success; and yet in the long-run the
forces are so nicely balanced, that the face of nature remains uniform
for long periods of time, though assuredly the merest trifle would
often give the victory to one organic being over another. Nevertheless
so profound is our ignorance, and so high our presumption, that we
marvel when we hear of the extinction of an organic being; and as we do
not see the cause, we invoke cataclysms to desolate the world, or
invent laws on the duration of the forms of life!

I am tempted to give one more instance showing how plants and animals,
most remote in the scale of nature, are bound together by a web of
complex relations. I shall hereafter have occasion to show that the
exotic Lobelia fulgens, in this part of England, is never visited by
insects, and consequently, from its peculiar structure, never can set a
seed. Many of our orchidaceous plants absolutely require the visits of
moths to remove their pollen-masses and thus to fertilise them. I have,
also, reason to believe that humble-bees are indispensable to the
fertilisation of the heartsease (Viola tricolor), for other bees do not
visit this flower. From experiments which I have tried, I have found
that the visits of bees, if not indispensable, are at least highly
beneficial to the fertilisation of our clovers; but humble-bees alone
visit the common red clover (Trifolium pratense), as other bees cannot
reach the nectar. Hence I have very little doubt, that if the whole
genus of humble-bees became
extinct or very rare in England, the heartsease and red clover would


In order to get a perfect gradation between two forms in the upper and
lower parts of the same formation, the deposit must have gone on
accumulating for a very long period, in order to have given sufficient
time for the slow process of variation; hence the deposit will
generally have to be a very thick one; and the species undergoing
modification will have had to live on the same area throughout this
whole time. But we have seen that a thick fossiliferous formation can
only be accumulated during a period of subsidence; and to keep the
depth approximately the same, which is necessary in order to enable the
same species to live on the same space, the supply of sediment must
nearly have counterbalanced the amount of subsidence. But this same
movement of subsidence will often tend to sink the area whence the
sediment is derived, and thus diminish the supply whilst the downward
movement continues. In fact, this nearly exact balancing between the
supply of sediment and the amount of subsidence is probably a rare
contingency; for it has been observed by more than one palæontologist,
that very thick deposits are usually barren of organic remains, except
near their upper or lower limits.

It would seem that each separate formation, like the whole pile of
formations in any country, has generally been intermittent in its
accumulation. When we see, as is so often the case, a formation
composed of beds of different mineralogical composition, we may
reasonably suspect that the process of deposition has been much
interrupted, as a change in the currents of the sea and a supply of
sediment of a different nature will
generally have been due to geographical changes requiring much time.
Nor will the closest inspection of a formation give any idea of the
time which its deposition has consumed. Many instances could be given
of beds only a few feet in thickness, representing formations,
elsewhere thousands of feet in thickness, and which must have required
an enormous period for their accumulation; yet no one ignorant of this
fact would have suspected the vast lapse of time represented by the
thinner formation. Many cases could be given of the lower beds of a
formation having been upraised, denuded, submerged, and then re-covered
by the upper beds of the same formation,—facts, showing what wide, yet
easily overlooked, intervals have occurred in its accumulation. In
other cases we have the plainest evidence in great fossilised trees,
still standing upright as they grew, of many long intervals of time and
changes of level during the process of deposition, which would never
even have been suspected, had not the trees chanced to have been
preserved: thus, Messrs. Lyell and Dawson found carboniferous beds 1400
feet thick in Nova Scotia, with ancient root-bearing strata, one above
the other, at no less than sixty-eight different levels. Hence, when
the same species occur at the bottom, middle, and top of a formation,
the probability is that they have not lived on the same spot during the
whole period of deposition, but have disappeared and reappeared,
perhaps many times, during the same geological period. So that if such
species were to undergo a considerable amount of modification during
any one geological period, a section would not probably include all the
fine intermediate gradations which must on my theory have existed
between them, but abrupt, though perhaps very slight, changes of form.

It is all-important to remember that naturalists have
no golden rule by which to distinguish species and varieties; they
grant some little variability to each species, but when they meet with
a somewhat greater amount of difference between any two forms, they
rank both as species, unless they are enabled to connect them together
by close intermediate gradations. And this from the reasons just
assigned we can seldom hope to effect in any one geological section.
Supposing B and C to be two species, and a third, A, to be found in an
underlying bed; even if A were strictly intermediate between B and C,
it would simply be ranked as a third and distinct species, unless at
the same time it could be most closely connected with either one or
both forms by intermediate varieties. Nor should it be forgotten, as
before explained, that A might be the actual progenitor of B and C, and
yet might not at all necessarily be strictly intermediate between them
in all points of structure. So that we might obtain the parent-species
and its several modified descendants from the lower and upper beds of a
formation, and unless we obtained numerous transitional gradations, we
should not recognise their relationship, and should consequently be
compelled to rank them all as distinct species.

It is notorious on what excessively slight differences many
palæontologists have founded their species; and they do this the more
readily if the specimens come from different sub-stages of the same
formation. Some experienced conchologists are now sinking many of the
very fine species of D’Orbigny and others into the rank of varieties;
and on this view we do find the kind of evidence of change which on my
theory we ought to find. Moreover, if we look to rather wider
intervals, namely, to distinct but consecutive stages of the same great
formation, we find that the embedded fossils, though almost universally
ranked as specifically different,
yet are far more closely allied to each other than are the species
found in more widely separated formations; but to this subject I shall
have to return in the following chapter.

One other consideration is worth notice: with animals and plants that
can propagate rapidly and are not highly locomotive, there is reason to
suspect, as we have formerly seen, that their varieties are generally
at first local; and that such local varieties do not spread widely and
supplant their parent-forms until they have been modified and perfected
in some considerable degree. According to this view, the chance of
discovering in a formation in any one country all the early stages of
transition between any two forms, is small, for the successive changes
are supposed to have been local or confined to some one spot. Most
marine animals have a wide range; and we have seen that with plants it
is those which have the widest range, that oftenest present varieties;
so that with shells and other marine animals, it is probably those
which have had the widest range, far exceeding the limits of the known
geological formations of Europe, which have oftenest given rise, first
to local varieties and ultimately to new species; and this again would
greatly lessen the chance of our being able to trace the stages of
transition in any one geological formation.

It should not be forgotten, that at the present day, with perfect
specimens for examination, two forms can seldom be connected by
intermediate varieties and thus proved to be the same species, until
many specimens have been collected from many places; and in the case of
fossil species this could rarely be effected by palæontologists. We
shall, perhaps, best perceive the improbability of our being enabled to
connect species by numerous, fine, intermediate, fossil links, by
asking
ourselves whether, for instance, geologists at some future period will
be able to prove, that our different breeds of cattle, sheep, horses,
and dogs have descended from a single stock or from several aboriginal
stocks; or, again, whether certain sea-shells inhabiting the shores of
North America, which are ranked by some conchologists as distinct
species from their European representatives, and by other conchologists
as only varieties, are really varieties or are, as it is called,
specifically distinct. This could be effected only by the future
geologist discovering in a fossil state numerous intermediate
gradations; and such success seems to me improbable in the highest
degree.

Geological research, though it has added numerous species to existing
and extinct genera, and has made the intervals between some few groups
less wide than they otherwise would have been, yet has done scarcely
anything in breaking down the distinction between species, by
connecting them together by numerous, fine, intermediate varieties; and
this not having been effected, is probably the gravest and most obvious
of all the many objections which may be urged against my views. Hence
it will be worth while to sum up the foregoing remarks, under an
imaginary illustration. The Malay Archipelago is of about the size of
Europe from the North Cape to the Mediterranean, and from Britain to
Russia; and therefore equals all the geological formations which have
been examined with any accuracy, excepting those of the United States
of America. I fully agree with Mr. Godwin-Austen, that the present
condition of the Malay Archipelago, with its numerous large islands
separated by wide and shallow seas, probably represents the former
state of Europe, when most of our formations were accumulating. The
Malay Archipelago is one of the richest regions of the
whole world in organic beings; yet if all the species were to be
collected which have ever lived there, how imperfectly would they
represent the natural history of the world!

But we have every reason to believe that the terrestrial productions of
the archipelago would be preserved in an excessively imperfect manner
in the formations which we suppose to be there accumulating. I suspect
that not many of the strictly littoral animals, or of those which lived
on naked submarine rocks, would be embedded; and those embedded in
gravel or sand, would not endure to a distant epoch. Wherever sediment
did not accumulate on the bed of the sea, or where it did not
accumulate at a sufficient rate to protect organic bodies from decay,
no remains could be preserved.

In our archipelago, I believe that fossiliferous formations could be
formed of sufficient thickness to last to an age, as distant in
futurity as the secondary formations lie in the past, only during
periods of subsidence. These periods of subsidence would be separated
from each other by enormous intervals, during which the area would be
either stationary or rising; whilst rising, each fossiliferous
formation would be destroyed, almost as soon as accumulated, by the
incessant coast-action, as we now see on the shores of South America.
During the periods of subsidence there would probably be much
extinction of life; during the periods of elevation, there would be
much variation, but the geological record would then be least perfect.

It may be doubted whether the duration of any one great period of
subsidence over the whole or part of the archipelago, together with a
contemporaneous accumulation of sediment, would _exceed_ the average
duration of the same specific forms; and these contingencies are
indispensable for the preservation of all the transitional gradations
between any two or more species. If such gradations were not fully
preserved, transitional varieties would merely appear as so many
distinct species. It is, also, probable that each great period of
subsidence would be interrupted by oscillations of level, and that
slight climatal changes would intervene during such lengthy periods;
and in these cases the inhabitants of the archipelago would have to
migrate, and no closely consecutive record of their modifications could
be preserved in any one formation.

Very many of the marine inhabitants of the archipelago now range
thousands of miles beyond its confines; and analogy leads me to believe
that it would be chiefly these far-ranging species which would oftenest
produce new varieties; and the varieties would at first generally be
local or confined to one place, but if possessed of any decided
advantage, or when further modified and improved, they would slowly
spread and supplant their parent-forms. When such varieties returned to
their ancient homes, as they would differ from their former state, in a
nearly uniform, though perhaps extremely slight degree, they would,
according to the principles followed by many palæontologists, be ranked
as new and distinct species.

If then, there be some degree of truth in these remarks, we have no
right to expect to find in our geological formations, an infinite
number of those fine transitional forms, which on my theory assuredly
have connected all the past and present species of the same group into
one long and branching chain of life. We ought only to look for a few
links, some more closely, some more distantly related to each other;
and these links, let them be ever so close, if found in different
stages of the same formation, would, by most palæontologists,
be ranked as distinct species. But I do not pretend that I should ever
have suspected how poor a record of the mutations of life, the best
preserved geological section presented, had not the difficulty of our
not discovering innumerable transitional links between the species
which appeared at the commencement and close of each formation, pressed
so hardly on my theory.

_On the sudden appearance of whole groups of Allied Species_.—The
abrupt manner in which whole groups of species suddenly appear in
certain formations, has been urged by several palæontologists, for
instance, by Agassiz, Pictet, and by none more forcibly than by
Professor Sedgwick, as a fatal objection to the belief in the
transmutation of species. If numerous species, belonging to the same
genera or families, have really started into life all at once, the fact
would be fatal to the theory of descent with slow modification through
natural selection. For the development of a group of forms, all of
which have descended from some one progenitor, must have been an
extremely slow process; and the progenitors must have lived long ages
before their modified descendants. But we continually over-rate the
perfection of the geological record, and falsely infer, because certain
genera or families have not been found beneath a certain stage, that
they did not exist before that stage. We continually forget how large
the world is, compared with the area over which our geological
formations have been carefully examined; we forget that groups of
species may elsewhere have long existed and have slowly multiplied
before they invaded the ancient archipelagoes of Europe and of the
United States. We do not make due allowance for the enormous intervals
of time, which have
probably elapsed between our consecutive formations,—longer perhaps in
some cases than the time required for the accumulation of each
formation. These intervals will have given time for the multiplication
of species from some one or some few parent-forms; and in the
succeeding formation such species will appear as if suddenly created.

I may here recall a remark formerly made, namely that it might require
a long succession of ages to adapt an organism to some new and peculiar
line of life, for instance to fly through the air; but that when this
had been effected, and a few species had thus acquired a great
advantage over other organisms, a comparatively short time would be
necessary to produce many divergent forms, which would be able to
spread rapidly and widely throughout the world.

I will now give a few examples to illustrate these remarks; and to show
how liable we are to error in supposing that whole groups of species
have suddenly been produced. I may recall the well-known fact that in
geological treatises, published not many years ago, the great class of
mammals was always spoken of as having abruptly come in at the
commencement of the tertiary series. And now one of the richest known
accumulations of fossil mammals belongs to the middle of the secondary
series; and one true mammal has been discovered in the new red
sandstone at nearly the commencement of this great series. Cuvier used
to urge that no monkey occurred in any tertiary stratum; but now
extinct species have been discovered in India, South America, and in
Europe even as far back as the eocene stage. The most striking case,
however, is that of the Whale family; as these animals have huge bones,
are marine, and range over the world, the fact of not a single bone of
a whale having been discovered in
any secondary formation, seemed fully to justify the belief that this
great and distinct order had been suddenly produced in the interval
between the latest secondary and earliest tertiary formation. But now
we may read in the Supplement to Lyell’s ‘Manual,’ published in 1858,
clear evidence of the existence of whales in the upper greensand, some
time before the close of the secondary period.

I may give another instance, which from having passed under my own eyes
has much struck me. In a memoir on Fossil Sessile Cirripedes, I have
stated that, from the number of existing and extinct tertiary species;
from the extraordinary abundance of the individuals of many species all
over the world, from the Arctic regions to the equator, inhabiting
various zones of depths from the upper tidal limits to 50 fathoms; from
the perfect manner in which specimens are preserved in the oldest
tertiary beds; from the ease with which even a fragment of a valve can
be recognised; from all these circumstances, I inferred that had
sessile cirripedes existed during the secondary periods, they would
certainly have been preserved and discovered; and as not one species
had been discovered in beds of this age, I concluded that this great
group had been suddenly developed at the commencement of the tertiary
series. This was a sore trouble to me, adding as I thought one more
instance of the abrupt appearance of a great group of species. But my
work had hardly been published, when a skilful palæontologist, M.
Bosquet, sent me a drawing of a perfect specimen of an unmistakeable
sessile cirripede, which he had himself extracted from the chalk of
Belgium. And, as if to make the case as striking as possible, this
sessile cirripede was a Chthamalus, a very common, large, and
ubiquitous genus, of which not one specimen has as yet been found even
in any tertiary
stratum. Hence we now positively know that sessile cirripedes existed
during the secondary period; and these cirripedes might have been the
progenitors of our many tertiary and existing species.

The case most frequently insisted on by palæontologists of the
apparently sudden appearance of a whole group of species, is that of
the teleostean fishes, low down in the Chalk period. This group
includes the large majority of existing species. Lately, Professor
Pictet has carried their existence one sub-stage further back; and some
palæontologists believe that certain much older fishes, of which the
affinities are as yet imperfectly known, are really teleostean.
Assuming, however, that the whole of them did appear, as Agassiz
believes, at the commencement of the chalk formation, the fact would
certainly be highly remarkable; but I cannot see that it would be an
insuperable difficulty on my theory, unless it could likewise be shown
that the species of this group appeared suddenly and simultaneously
throughout the world at this same period. It is almost superfluous to
remark that hardly any fossil-fish are known from south of the equator;
and by running through Pictet’s Palæontology it will be seen that very
few species are known from several formations in Europe. Some few
families of fish now have a confined range; the teleostean fish might
formerly have had a similarly confined range, and after having been
largely developed in some one sea, might have spread widely. Nor have
we any right to suppose that the seas of the world have always been so
freely open from south to north as they are at present. Even at this
day, if the Malay Archipelago were converted into land, the tropical
parts of the Indian Ocean would form a large and perfectly enclosed
basin, in which any great group of marine animals might be multiplied;
and
here they would remain confined, until some of the species became
adapted to a cooler climate, and were enabled to double the southern
capes of Africa or Australia, and thus reach other and distant seas.

From these and similar considerations, but chiefly from our ignorance
of the geology of other countries beyond the confines of Europe and the
United States; and from the revolution in our palæontological ideas on
many points, which the discoveries of even the last dozen years have
effected, it seems to me to be about as rash in us to dogmatize on the
succession of organic beings throughout the world, as it would be for a
naturalist to land for five minutes on some one barren point in
Australia, and then to discuss the number and range of its productions.

_On the sudden appearance of groups of Allied Species in the lowest
known fossiliferous strata_.—There is another and allied difficulty,
which is much graver. I allude to the manner in which numbers of
species of the same group, suddenly appear in the lowest known
fossiliferous rocks. Most of the arguments which have convinced me that
all the existing species of the same group have descended from one
progenitor, apply with nearly equal force to the earliest known
species. For instance, I cannot doubt that all the Silurian trilobites
have descended from some one crustacean, which must have lived long
before the Silurian age, and which probably differed greatly from any
known animal. Some of the most ancient Silurian animals, as the
Nautilus, Lingula, etc., do not differ much from living species; and it
cannot on my theory be supposed, that these old species were the
progenitors of all the species of the orders to which they belong, for
they do not present characters in any degree intermediate between them.
If, moreover, they had been the progenitors of these orders, they would
almost certainly have been long ago supplanted and exterminated by
their numerous and improved descendants.

Consequently, if my theory be true, it is indisputable that before the
lowest Silurian stratum was deposited, long periods elapsed, as long
as, or probably far longer than, the whole interval from the Silurian
age to the present day; and that during these vast, yet quite unknown,
periods of time, the world swarmed with living creatures.

To the question why we do not find records of these vast primordial
periods, I can give no satisfactory answer. Several of the most eminent
geologists, with Sir R. Murchison at their head, are convinced that we
see in the organic remains of the lowest Silurian stratum the dawn of
life on this planet. Other highly competent judges, as Lyell and the
late E. Forbes, dispute this conclusion. We should not forget that only
a small portion of the world is known with accuracy. M. Barrande has
lately added another and lower stage to the Silurian system, abounding
with new and peculiar species. Traces of life have been detected in the
Longmynd beds beneath Barrande’s so-called primordial zone. The
presence of phosphatic nodules and bituminous matter in some of the
lowest azoic rocks, probably indicates the former existence of life at
these periods. But the difficulty of understanding the absence of vast
piles of fossiliferous strata, which on my theory no doubt were
somewhere accumulated before the Silurian epoch, is very great. If
these most ancient beds had been wholly worn away by denudation, or
obliterated by metamorphic action, we ought to find only small remnants
of the formations next succeeding them in age, and these ought to be
very generally in
a metamorphosed condition. But the descriptions which we now possess of
the Silurian deposits over immense territories in Russia and in North
America, do not support the view, that the older a formation is, the
more it has suffered the extremity of denudation and metamorphism.

The case at present must remain inexplicable; and may be truly urged as
a valid argument against the views here entertained. To show that it
may hereafter receive some explanation, I will give the following
hypothesis. From the nature of the organic remains, which do not appear
to have inhabited profound depths, in the several formations of Europe
and of the United States; and from the amount of sediment, miles in
thickness, of which the formations are composed, we may infer that from
first to last large islands or tracts of land, whence the sediment was
derived, occurred in the neighbourhood of the existing continents of
Europe and North America. But we do not know what was the state of
things in the intervals between the successive formations; whether
Europe and the United States during these intervals existed as dry
land, or as a submarine surface near land, on which sediment was not
deposited, or again as the bed of an open and unfathomable sea.

Looking to the existing oceans, which are thrice as extensive as the
land, we see them studded with many islands; but not one oceanic island
is as yet known to afford even a remnant of any palæozoic or secondary
formation. Hence we may perhaps infer, that during the palæozoic and
secondary periods, neither continents nor continental islands existed
where our oceans now extend; for had they existed there, palæozoic and
secondary formations would in all probability have been accumulated
from sediment derived from their wear and
tear; and would have been at least partially upheaved by the
oscillations of level, which we may fairly conclude must have
intervened during these enormously long periods. If then we may infer
anything from these facts, we may infer that where our oceans now
extend, oceans have extended from the remotest period of which we have
any record; and on the other hand, that where continents now exist,
large tracts of land have existed, subjected no doubt to great
oscillations of level, since the earliest silurian period. The coloured
map appended to my volume on Coral Reefs, led me to conclude that the
great oceans are still mainly areas of subsidence, the great
archipelagoes still areas of oscillations of level, and the continents
areas of elevation. But have we any right to assume that things have
thus remained from eternity? Our continents seem to have been formed by
a preponderance, during many oscillations of level, of the force of
elevation; but may not the areas of preponderant movement have changed
in the lapse of ages? At a period immeasurably antecedent to the
silurian epoch, continents may have existed where oceans are now spread
out; and clear and open oceans may have existed where our continents
now stand. Nor should we be justified in assuming that if, for
instance, the bed of the Pacific Ocean were now converted into a
continent, we should there find formations older than the silurian
strata, supposing such to have been formerly deposited; for it might
well happen that strata which had subsided some miles nearer to the
centre of the earth, and which had been pressed on by an enormous
weight of superincumbent water, might have undergone far more
metamorphic action than strata which have always remained nearer to the
surface. The immense areas in some parts of the world, for instance in
South America, of bare metamorphic rocks, which
must have been heated under great pressure, have always seemed to me to
require some special explanation; and we may perhaps believe that we
see in these large areas, the many formations long anterior to the
silurian epoch in a completely metamorphosed condition.

The several difficulties here discussed, namely our not finding in the
successive formations infinitely numerous transitional links between
the many species which now exist or have existed; the sudden manner in
which whole groups of species appear in our European formations; the
almost entire absence, as at present known, of fossiliferous formations
beneath the Silurian strata, are all undoubtedly of the gravest nature.
We see this in the plainest manner by the fact that all the most
eminent palæontologists, namely Cuvier, Owen, Agassiz, Barrande,
Falconer, E. Forbes, etc., and all our greatest geologists, as Lyell,
Murchison, Sedgwick, etc., have unanimously, often vehemently,
maintained the immutability of species. But I have reason to believe
that one great authority, Sir Charles Lyell, from further reflexion
entertains grave doubts on this subject. I feel how rash it is to
differ from these great authorities, to whom, with others, we owe all
our knowledge. Those who think the natural geological record in any
degree perfect, and who do not attach much weight to the facts and
arguments of other kinds given in this volume, will undoubtedly at once
reject my theory. For my part, following out Lyell’s metaphor, I look
at the natural geological record, as a history of the world imperfectly
kept, and written in a changing dialect; of this history we possess the
last volume alone, relating only to two or three countries. Of this
volume, only here and there a short chapter has
been preserved; and of each page, only here and there a few lines. Each
word of the slowly-changing language, in which the history is supposed
to be written, being more or less different in the interrupted
succession of chapters, may represent the apparently abruptly changed
forms of life, entombed in our consecutive, but widely separated
formations. On this view, the difficulties above discussed are greatly
diminished, or even disappear.




CHAPTER X.
ON THE GEOLOGICAL SUCCESSION OF ORGANIC BEINGS.


On the slow and successive appearance of new species. On their
different rates of change. Species once lost do not reappear. Groups of
species follow the same general rules in their appearance and
disappearance as do single species. On Extinction. On simultaneous
changes in the forms of life throughout the world. On the affinities of
extinct species to each other and to living species. On the state of
development of ancient forms. On the succession of the same types
within the same areas. Summary of preceding and present chapters.


Let us now see whether the several facts and rules relating to the
geological succession of organic beings, better accord with the common
view of the immutability of species, or with that of their slow and
gradual modification, through descent and natural selection.

New species have appeared very slowly, one after another, both on the
land and in the waters. Lyell has shown that it is hardly possible to
resist the evidence on this head in the case of the several tertiary
stages; and every year tends to fill up the blanks between them, and to
make the percentage system of lost and new forms more gradual. In some
of the most recent beds, though undoubtedly of high antiquity if
measured by years, only one or two species are lost forms, and only one
or two are new forms, having here appeared for the first time, either
locally, or, as far as we know, on the face of the earth. If we may
trust the observations of Philippi in Sicily, the successive changes in
the marine inhabitants of that island have been many and most gradual.
The secondary formations are more broken; but, as Bronn has remarked,
neither the appearance
nor disappearance of their many now extinct species has been
simultaneous in each separate formation.

Species of different genera and classes have not changed at the same
rate, or in the same degree. In the oldest tertiary beds a few living
shells may still be found in the midst of a multitude of extinct forms.
Falconer has given a striking instance of a similar fact, in an
existing crocodile associated with many strange and lost mammals and
reptiles in the sub-Himalayan deposits. The Silurian Lingula differs
but little from the living species of this genus; whereas most of the
other Silurian Molluscs and all the Crustaceans have changed greatly.
The productions of the land seem to change at a quicker rate than those
of the sea, of which a striking instance has lately been observed in
Switzerland. There is some reason to believe that organisms, considered
high in the scale of nature, change more quickly than those that are
low: though there are exceptions to this rule. The amount of organic
change, as Pictet has remarked, does not strictly correspond with the
succession of our geological formations; so that between each two
consecutive formations, the forms of life have seldom changed in
exactly the same degree. Yet if we compare any but the most closely
related formations, all the species will be found to have undergone
some change. When a species has once disappeared from the face of the
earth, we have reason to believe that the same identical form never
reappears. The strongest apparent exception to this latter rule, is
that of the so-called “colonies” of M. Barrande, which intrude for a
period in the midst of an older formation, and then allow the
pre-existing fauna to reappear; but Lyell’s explanation, namely, that
it is a case of temporary migration from a distinct geographical
province, seems to me satisfactory.


These several facts accord well with my theory. I believe in no fixed
law of development, causing all the inhabitants of a country to change
abruptly, or simultaneously, or to an equal degree. The process of
modification must be extremely slow. The variability of each species is
quite independent of that of all others. Whether such variability be
taken advantage of by natural selection, and whether the variations be
accumulated to a greater or lesser amount, thus causing a greater or
lesser amount of modification in the varying species, depends on many
complex contingencies,—on the variability being of a beneficial nature,
on the power of intercrossing, on the rate of breeding, on the slowly
changing physical conditions of the country, and more especially on the
nature of the other inhabitants with which the varying species comes
into competition. Hence it is by no means surprising that one species
should retain the same identical form much longer than others; or, if
changing, that it should change less. We see the same fact in
geographical distribution; for instance, in the land-shells and
coleopterous insects of Madeira having come to differ considerably from
their nearest allies on the continent of Europe, whereas the marine
shells and birds have remained unaltered. We can perhaps understand the
apparently quicker rate of change in terrestrial and in more highly
organised productions compared with marine and lower productions, by
the more complex relations of the higher beings to their organic and
inorganic conditions of life, as explained in a former chapter. When
many of the inhabitants of a country have become modified and improved,
we can understand, on the principle of competition, and on that of the
many all-important relations of organism to organism, that any form
which does not become in some degree modified and improved,
will be liable to be exterminated. Hence we can see why all the species
in the same region do at last, if we look to wide enough intervals of
time, become modified; for those which do not change will become
extinct.

In members of the same class the average amount of change, during long
and equal periods of time, may, perhaps, be nearly the same; but as the
accumulation of long-enduring fossiliferous formations depends on great
masses of sediment having been deposited on areas whilst subsiding, our
formations have been almost necessarily accumulated at wide and
irregularly intermittent intervals; consequently the amount of organic
change exhibited by the fossils embedded in consecutive formations is
not equal. Each formation, on this view, does not mark a new and
complete act of creation, but only an occasional scene, taken almost at
hazard, in a slowly changing drama.

We can clearly understand why a species when once lost should never
reappear, even if the very same conditions of life, organic and
inorganic, should recur. For though the offspring of one species might
be adapted (and no doubt this has occurred in innumerable instances) to
fill the exact place of another species in the economy of nature, and
thus supplant it; yet the two forms—the old and the new—would not be
identically the same; for both would almost certainly inherit different
characters from their distinct progenitors. For instance, it is just
possible, if our fantail-pigeons were all destroyed, that fanciers, by
striving during long ages for the same object, might make a new breed
hardly distinguishable from our present fantail; but if the parent
rock-pigeon were also destroyed, and in nature we have every reason to
believe that the parent-form will generally be supplanted and
exterminated by its improved offspring, it is quite incredible that a
fantail, identical with the existing breed, could be raised from any
other species of pigeon, or even from the other well-established races
of the domestic pigeon, for the newly-formed fantail would be almost
sure to inherit from its new progenitor some slight characteristic
differences.

Groups of species, that is, genera and families, follow the same
general rules in their appearance and disappearance as do single
species, changing more or less quickly, and in a greater or lesser
degree. A group does not reappear after it has once disappeared; or its
existence, as long as it lasts, is continuous. I am aware that there
are some apparent exceptions to this rule, but the exceptions are
surprisingly few, so few, that E. Forbes, Pictet, and Woodward (though
all strongly opposed to such views as I maintain) admit its truth; and
the rule strictly accords with my theory. For as all the species of the
same group have descended from some one species, it is clear that as
long as any species of the group have appeared in the long succession
of ages, so long must its members have continuously existed, in order
to have generated either new and modified or the same old and
unmodified forms. Species of the genus Lingula, for instance, must have
continuously existed by an unbroken succession of generations, from the
lowest Silurian stratum to the present day.

We have seen in the last chapter that the species of a group sometimes
falsely appear to have come in abruptly; and I have attempted to give
an explanation of this fact, which if true would have been fatal to my
views. But such cases are certainly exceptional; the general rule being
a gradual increase in number, till the group reaches its maximum, and
then, sooner or later, it gradually decreases. If the
number of the species of a genus, or the number of the genera of a
family, be represented by a vertical line of varying thickness,
crossing the successive geological formations in which the species are
found, the line will sometimes falsely appear to begin at its lower
end, not in a sharp point, but abruptly; it then gradually thickens
upwards, sometimes keeping for a space of equal thickness, and
ultimately thins out in the upper beds, marking the decrease and final
extinction of the species. This gradual increase in number of the
species of a group is strictly conformable with my theory; as the
species of the same genus, and the genera of the same family, can
increase only slowly and progressively; for the process of modification
and the production of a number of allied forms must be slow and
gradual,—one species giving rise first to two or three varieties, these
being slowly converted into species, which in their turn produce by
equally slow steps other species, and so on, like the branching of a
great tree from a single stem, till the group becomes large.

_On Extinction_.—We have as yet spoken only incidentally of the
disappearance of species and of groups of species. On the theory of
natural selection the extinction of old forms and the production of new
and improved forms are intimately connected together. The old notion of
all the inhabitants of the earth having been swept away at successive
periods by catastrophes, is very generally given up, even by those
geologists, as Elie de Beaumont, Murchison, Barrande, etc., whose
general views would naturally lead them to this conclusion. On the
contrary, we have every reason to believe, from the study of the
tertiary formations, that species and groups of species gradually
disappear, one after another, first from one spot, then from another,
and
finally from the world. Both single species and whole groups of species
last for very unequal periods; some groups, as we have seen, having
endured from the earliest known dawn of life to the present day; some
having disappeared before the close of the palæozoic period. No fixed
law seems to determine the length of time during which any single
species or any single genus endures. There is reason to believe that
the complete extinction of the species of a group is generally a slower
process than their production: if the appearance and disappearance of a
group of species be represented, as before, by a vertical line of
varying thickness, the line is found to taper more gradually at its
upper end, which marks the progress of extermination, than at its lower
end, which marks the first appearance and increase in numbers of the
species. In some cases, however, the extermination of whole groups of
beings, as of ammonites towards the close of the secondary period, has
been wonderfully sudden.

The whole subject of the extinction of species has been involved in the
most gratuitous mystery. Some authors have even supposed that as the
individual has a definite length of life, so have species a definite
duration. No one I think can have marvelled more at the extinction of
species, than I have done. When I found in La Plata the tooth of a
horse embedded with the remains of Mastodon, Megatherium, Toxodon, and
other extinct monsters, which all co-existed with still living shells
at a very late geological period, I was filled with astonishment; for
seeing that the horse, since its introduction by the Spaniards into
South America, has run wild over the whole country and has increased in
numbers at an unparalleled rate, I asked myself what could so recently
have exterminated the former horse under conditions of life apparently
so favourable. But
how utterly groundless was my astonishment! Professor Owen soon
perceived that the tooth, though so like that of the existing horse,
belonged to an extinct species. Had this horse been still living, but
in some degree rare, no naturalist would have felt the least surprise
at its rarity; for rarity is the attribute of a vast number of species
of all classes, in all countries. If we ask ourselves why this or that
species is rare, we answer that something is unfavourable in its
conditions of life; but what that something is, we can hardly ever
tell. On the supposition of the fossil horse still existing as a rare
species, we might have felt certain from the analogy of all other
mammals, even of the slow-breeding elephant, and from the history of
the naturalisation of the domestic horse in South America, that under
more favourable conditions it would in a very few years have stocked
the whole continent. But we could not have told what the unfavourable
conditions were which checked its increase, whether some one or several
contingencies, and at what period of the horse’s life, and in what
degree, they severally acted. If the conditions had gone on, however
slowly, becoming less and less favourable, we assuredly should not have
perceived the fact, yet the fossil horse would certainly have become
rarer and rarer, and finally extinct;—its place being seized on by some
more successful competitor.

It is most difficult always to remember that the increase of every
living being is constantly being checked by unperceived injurious
agencies; and that these same unperceived agencies are amply sufficient
to cause rarity, and finally extinction. We see in many cases in the
more recent tertiary formations, that rarity precedes extinction; and
we know that this has been the progress of events with those animals
which have
been exterminated, either locally or wholly, through man’s agency. I
may repeat what I published in 1845, namely, that to admit that species
generally become rare before they become extinct—to feel no surprise at
the rarity of a species, and yet to marvel greatly when it ceases to
exist, is much the same as to admit that sickness in the individual is
the forerunner of death—to feel no surprise at sickness, but when the
sick man dies, to wonder and to suspect that he died by some unknown
deed of violence.

The theory of natural selection is grounded on the belief that each new
variety, and ultimately each new species, is produced and maintained by
having some advantage over those with which it comes into competition;
and the consequent extinction of less-favoured forms almost inevitably
follows. It is the same with our domestic productions: when a new and
slightly improved variety has been raised, it at first supplants the
less improved varieties in the same neighbourhood; when much improved
it is transported far and near, like our short-horn cattle, and takes
the place of other breeds in other countries. Thus the appearance of
new forms and the disappearance of old forms, both natural and
artificial, are bound together. In certain flourishing groups, the
number of new specific forms which have been produced within a given
time is probably greater than that of the old forms which have been
exterminated; but we know that the number of species has not gone on
indefinitely increasing, at least during the later geological periods,
so that looking to later times we may believe that the production of
new forms has caused the extinction of about the same number of old
forms.

The competition will generally be most severe, as formerly explained
and illustrated by examples, between the forms which are most like each
other in all respects.
Hence the improved and modified descendants of a species will generally
cause the extermination of the parent-species; and if many new forms
have been developed from any one species, the nearest allies of that
species, _i.e._ the species of the same genus, will be the most liable
to extermination. Thus, as I believe, a number of new species descended
from one species, that is a new genus, comes to supplant an old genus,
belonging to the same family. But it must often have happened that a
new species belonging to some one group will have seized on the place
occupied by a species belonging to a distinct group, and thus caused
its extermination; and if many allied forms be developed from the
successful intruder, many will have to yield their places; and it will
generally be allied forms, which will suffer from some inherited
inferiority in common. But whether it be species belonging to the same
or to a distinct class, which yield their places to other species which
have been modified and improved, a few of the sufferers may often long
be preserved, from being fitted to some peculiar line of life, or from
inhabiting some distant and isolated station, where they have escaped
severe competition. For instance, a single species of Trigonia, a great
genus of shells in the secondary formations, survives in the Australian
seas; and a few members of the great and almost extinct group of Ganoid
fishes still inhabit our fresh waters. Therefore the utter extinction
of a group is generally, as we have seen, a slower process than its
production.

With respect to the apparently sudden extermination of whole families
or orders, as of Trilobites at the close of the palæozoic period and of
Ammonites at the close of the secondary period, we must remember what
has been already said on the probable wide intervals of time
between our consecutive formations; and in these intervals there may
have been much slow extermination. Moreover, when by sudden immigration
or by unusually rapid development, many species of a new group have
taken possession of a new area, they will have exterminated in a
correspondingly rapid manner many of the old inhabitants; and the forms
which thus yield their places will commonly be allied, for they will
partake of some inferiority in common.

Thus, as it seems to me, the manner in which single species and whole
groups of species become extinct, accords well with the theory of
natural selection. We need not marvel at extinction; if we must marvel,
let it be at our presumption in imagining for a moment that we
understand the many complex contingencies, on which the existence of
each species depends. If we forget for an instant, that each species
tends to increase inordinately, and that some check is always in
action, yet seldom perceived by us, the whole economy of nature will be
utterly obscured. Whenever we can precisely say why this species is
more abundant in individuals than that; why this species and not
another can be naturalised in a given country; then, and not till then,
we may justly feel surprise why we cannot account for the extinction of
this particular species or group of species.

_On the Forms of Life changing almost simultaneously throughout the
World_.—Scarcely any palæontological discovery is more striking than
the fact, that the forms of life change almost simultaneously
throughout the world. Thus our European Chalk formation can be
recognised in many distant parts of the world, under the most different
climates, where not a fragment of the mineral chalk itself can be
found; namely, in North
America, in equatorial South America, in Tierra del Fuego, at the Cape
of Good Hope, and in the peninsula of India. For at these distant
points, the organic remains in certain beds present an unmistakeable
degree of resemblance to those of the Chalk. It is not that the same
species are met with; for in some cases not one species is identically
the same, but they belong to the same families, genera, and sections of
genera, and sometimes are similarly characterised in such trifling
points as mere superficial sculpture. Moreover other forms, which are
not found in the Chalk of Europe, but which occur in the formations
either above or below, are similarly absent at these distant points of
the world. In the several successive palæozoic formations of Russia,
Western Europe and North America, a similar parallelism in the forms of
life has been observed by several authors: so it is, according to
Lyell, with the several European and North American tertiary deposits.
Even if the few fossil species which are common to the Old and New
Worlds be kept wholly out of view, the general parallelism in the
successive forms of life, in the stages of the widely separated
palæozoic and tertiary periods, would still be manifest, and the
several formations could be easily correlated.

These observations, however, relate to the marine inhabitants of
distant parts of the world: we have not sufficient data to judge
whether the productions of the land and of fresh water change at
distant points in the same parallel manner. We may doubt whether they
have thus changed: if the Megatherium, Mylodon, Macrauchenia, and
Toxodon had been brought to Europe from La Plata, without any
information in regard to their geological position, no one would have
suspected that they had coexisted with still living sea-shells; but as
these anomalous monsters coexisted with the Mastodon
and Horse, it might at least have been inferred that they had lived
during one of the latter tertiary stages.

When the marine forms of life are spoken of as having changed
simultaneously throughout the world, it must not be supposed that this
expression relates to the same thousandth or hundred-thousandth year,
or even that it has a very strict geological sense; for if all the
marine animals which live at the present day in Europe, and all those
that lived in Europe during the pleistocene period (an enormously
remote period as measured by years, including the whole glacial epoch),
were to be compared with those now living in South America or in
Australia, the most skilful naturalist would hardly be able to say
whether the existing or the pleistocene inhabitants of Europe resembled
most closely those of the southern hemisphere. So, again, several
highly competent observers believe that the existing productions of the
United States are more closely related to those which lived in Europe
during certain later tertiary stages, than to those which now live
here; and if this be so, it is evident that fossiliferous beds
deposited at the present day on the shores of North America would
hereafter be liable to be classed with somewhat older European beds.
Nevertheless, looking to a remotely future epoch, there can, I think,
be little doubt that all the more modern _marine_ formations, namely,
the upper pliocene, the pleistocene and strictly modern beds, of
Europe, North and South America, and Australia, from containing fossil
remains in some degree allied, and from not including those forms which
are only found in the older underlying deposits, would be correctly
ranked as simultaneous in a geological sense.

The fact of the forms of life changing simultaneously, in the above
large sense, at distant parts of the world, has greatly struck those
admirable observers, MM.
de Verneuil and d’Archiac. After referring to the parallelism of the
palæozoic forms of life in various parts of Europe, they add, “If
struck by this strange sequence, we turn our attention to North
America, and there discover a series of analogous phenomena, it will
appear certain that all these modifications of species, their
extinction, and the introduction of new ones, cannot be owing to mere
changes in marine currents or other causes more or less local and
temporary, but depend on general laws which govern the whole animal
kingdom.” M. Barrande has made forcible remarks to precisely the same
effect. It is, indeed, quite futile to look to changes of currents,
climate, or other physical conditions, as the cause of these great
mutations in the forms of life throughout the world, under the most
different climates. We must, as Barrande has remarked, look to some
special law. We shall see this more clearly when we treat of the
present distribution of organic beings, and find how slight is the
relation between the physical conditions of various countries, and the
nature of their inhabitants.

This great fact of the parallel succession of the forms of life
throughout the world, is explicable on the theory of natural selection.
New species are formed by new varieties arising, which have some
advantage over older forms; and those forms, which are already
dominant, or have some advantage over the other forms in their own
country, would naturally oftenest give rise to new varieties or
incipient species; for these latter must be victorious in a still
higher degree in order to be preserved and to survive. We have distinct
evidence on this head, in the plants which are dominant, that is, which
are commonest in their own homes, and are most widely diffused, having
produced the greatest number of new varieties. It is also natural that
the dominant,
varying, and far-spreading species, which already have invaded to a
certain extent the territories of other species, should be those which
would have the best chance of spreading still further, and of giving
rise in new countries to new varieties and species. The process of
diffusion may often be very slow, being dependent on climatal and
geographical changes, or on strange accidents, but in the long run the
dominant forms will generally succeed in spreading. The diffusion
would, it is probable, be slower with the terrestrial inhabitants of
distinct continents than with the marine inhabitants of the continuous
sea. We might therefore expect to find, as we apparently do find, a
less strict degree of parallel succession in the productions of the
land than of the sea.

Dominant species spreading from any region might encounter still more
dominant species, and then their triumphant course, or even their
existence, would cease. We know not at all precisely what are all the
conditions most favourable for the multiplication of new and dominant
species; but we can, I think, clearly see that a number of individuals,
from giving a better chance of the appearance of favourable variations,
and that severe competition with many already existing forms, would be
highly favourable, as would be the power of spreading into new
territories. A certain amount of isolation, recurring at long intervals
of time, would probably be also favourable, as before explained. One
quarter of the world may have been most favourable for the production
of new and dominant species on the land, and another for those in the
waters of the sea. If two great regions had been for a long period
favourably circumstanced in an equal degree, whenever their inhabitants
met, the battle would be prolonged and severe; and some from one
birthplace and some from the other might be victorious. But in the
course of time, the
forms dominant in the highest degree, wherever produced, would tend
everywhere to prevail. As they prevailed, they would cause the
extinction of other and inferior forms; and as these inferior forms
would be allied in groups by inheritance, whole groups would tend
slowly to disappear; though here and there a single member might long
be enabled to survive.

Thus, as it seems to me, the parallel, and, taken in a large sense,
simultaneous, succession of the same forms of life throughout the
world, accords well with the principle of new species having been
formed by dominant species spreading widely and varying; the new
species thus produced being themselves dominant owing to inheritance,
and to having already had some advantage over their parents or over
other species; these again spreading, varying, and producing new
species. The forms which are beaten and which yield their places to the
new and victorious forms, will generally be allied in groups, from
inheriting some inferiority in common; and therefore as new and
improved groups spread throughout the world, old groups will disappear
from the world; and the succession of forms in both ways will
everywhere tend to correspond.

There is one other remark connected with this subject worth making. I
have given my reasons for believing that all our greater fossiliferous
formations were deposited during periods of subsidence; and that blank
intervals of vast duration occurred during the periods when the bed of
the sea was either stationary or rising, and likewise when sediment was
not thrown down quickly enough to embed and preserve organic remains.
During these long and blank intervals I suppose that the inhabitants of
each region underwent a considerable amount of modification and
extinction, and that there was much migration from
other parts of the world. As we have reason to believe that large areas
are affected by the same movement, it is probable that strictly
contemporaneous formations have often been accumulated over very wide
spaces in the same quarter of the world; but we are far from having any
right to conclude that this has invariably been the case, and that
large areas have invariably been affected by the same movements. When
two formations have been deposited in two regions during nearly, but
not exactly the same period, we should find in both, from the causes
explained in the foregoing paragraphs, the same general succession in
the forms of life; but the species would not exactly correspond; for
there will have been a little more time in the one region than in the
other for modification, extinction, and immigration.

I suspect that cases of this nature have occurred in Europe. Mr.
Prestwich, in his admirable Memoirs on the eocene deposits of England
and France, is able to draw a close general parallelism between the
successive stages in the two countries; but when he compares certain
stages in England with those in France, although he finds in both a
curious accordance in the numbers of the species belonging to the same
genera, yet the species themselves differ in a manner very difficult to
account for, considering the proximity of the two areas,—unless,
indeed, it be assumed that an isthmus separated two seas inhabited by
distinct, but contemporaneous, faunas. Lyell has made similar
observations on some of the later tertiary formations. Barrande, also,
shows that there is a striking general parallelism in the successive
Silurian deposits of Bohemia and Scandinavia; nevertheless he finds a
surprising amount of difference in the species. If the several
formations in these regions have not been deposited during the same
exact
periods,—a formation in one region often corresponding with a blank
interval in the other,—and if in both regions the species have gone on
slowly changing during the accumulation of the several formations and
during the long intervals of time between them; in this case, the
several formations in the two regions could be arranged in the same
order, in accordance with the general succession of the form of life,
and the order would falsely appear to be strictly parallel;
nevertheless the species would not all be the same in the apparently
corresponding stages in the two regions.

_On the Affinities of extinct Species to each other, and to living
forms_.—Let us now look to the mutual affinities of extinct and living
species. They all fall into one grand natural system; and this fact is
at once explained on the principle of descent. The more ancient any
form is, the more, as a general rule, it differs from living forms.
But, as Buckland long ago remarked, all fossils can be classed either
in still existing groups, or between them. That the extinct forms of
life help to fill up the wide intervals between existing genera,
families, and orders, cannot be disputed. For if we confine our
attention either to the living or to the extinct alone, the series is
far less perfect than if we combine both into one general system. With
respect to the Vertebrata, whole pages could be filled with striking
illustrations from our great palæontologist, Owen, showing how extinct
animals fall in between existing groups. Cuvier ranked the Ruminants
and Pachyderms, as the two most distinct orders of mammals; but Owen
has discovered so many fossil links, that he has had to alter the whole
classification of these two orders; and has placed certain pachyderms
in the same sub-order with ruminants: for example, he dissolves by fine
gradations the apparently
wide difference between the pig and the camel. In regard to the
Invertebrata, Barrande, and a higher authority could not be named,
asserts that he is every day taught that palæozoic animals, though
belonging to the same orders, families, or genera with those living at
the present day, were not at this early epoch limited in such distinct
groups as they now are.

Some writers have objected to any extinct species or group of species
being considered as intermediate between living species or groups. If
by this term it is meant that an extinct form is directly intermediate
in all its characters between two living forms, the objection is
probably valid. But I apprehend that in a perfectly natural
classification many fossil species would have to stand between living
species, and some extinct genera between living genera, even between
genera belonging to distinct families. The most common case, especially
with respect to very distinct groups, such as fish and reptiles, seems
to be, that supposing them to be distinguished at the present day from
each other by a dozen characters, the ancient members of the same two
groups would be distinguished by a somewhat lesser number of
characters, so that the two groups, though formerly quite distinct, at
that period made some small approach to each other.

It is a common belief that the more ancient a form is, by so much the
more it tends to connect by some of its characters groups now widely
separated from each other. This remark no doubt must be restricted to
those groups which have undergone much change in the course of
geological ages; and it would be difficult to prove the truth of the
proposition, for every now and then even a living animal, as the
Lepidosiren, is discovered having affinities directed towards very
distinct groups. Yet if we compare the older Reptiles and
Batrachians, the older Fish, the older Cephalopods, and the eocene
Mammals, with the more recent members of the same classes, we must
admit that there is some truth in the remark.

Let us see how far these several facts and inferences accord with the
theory of descent with modification. As the subject is somewhat
complex, I must request the reader to turn to the diagram in the fourth
chapter. We may suppose that the numbered letters represent genera, and
the dotted lines diverging from them the species in each genus. The
diagram is much too simple, too few genera and too few species being
given, but this is unimportant for us. The horizontal lines may
represent successive geological formations, and all the forms beneath
the uppermost line may be considered as extinct. The three existing
genera, _a_14, _q_14, _p_14, will form a small family; _b_14 and _f_14
a closely allied family or sub-family; and _o_14, _e_14, _m_14, a third
family. These three families, together with the many extinct genera on
the several lines of descent diverging from the parent-form A, will
form an order; for all will have inherited something in common from
their ancient and common progenitor. On the principle of the continued
tendency to divergence of character, which was formerly illustrated by
this diagram, the more recent any form is, the more it will generally
differ from its ancient progenitor. Hence we can understand the rule
that the most ancient fossils differ most from existing forms. We must
not, however, assume that divergence of character is a necessary
contingency; it depends solely on the descendants from a species being
thus enabled to seize on many and different places in the economy of
nature. Therefore it is quite possible, as we have seen in the case of
some Silurian forms, that a species might go on being slightly
modified in relation to its slightly altered conditions of life, and
yet retain throughout a vast period the same general characteristics.
This is represented in the diagram by the letter F14.

All the many forms, extinct and recent, descended from A, make, as
before remarked, one order; and this order, from the continued effects
of extinction and divergence of character, has become divided into
several sub-families and families, some of which are supposed to have
perished at different periods, and some to have endured to the present
day.

By looking at the diagram we can see that if many of the extinct forms,
supposed to be embedded in the successive formations, were discovered
at several points low down in the series, the three existing families
on the uppermost line would be rendered less distinct from each other.
If, for instance, the genera _a_1, _a_5, _a_10, _f_8, _m_3, _m_6, _m_9
were disinterred, these three families would be so closely linked
together that they probably would have to be united into one great
family, in nearly the same manner as has occurred with ruminants and
pachyderms. Yet he who objected to call the extinct genera, which thus
linked the living genera of three families together, intermediate in
character, would be justified, as they are intermediate, not directly,
but only by a long and circuitous course through many widely different
forms. If many extinct forms were to be discovered above one of the
middle horizontal lines or geological formations—for instance, above
Number VI.—but none from beneath this line, then only the two families
on the left hand (namely, _a_14, etc., and _b_14, etc.) would have to
be united into one family; and the two other families (namely, _a_14 to
_f_14 now including five genera, and _o_14 to _m_14) would yet remain
distinct. These two families, however, would be less distinct from each
other than they were before the
discovery of the fossils. If, for instance, we suppose the existing
genera of the two families to differ from each other by a dozen
characters, in this case the genera, at the early period marked VI.,
would differ by a lesser number of characters; for at this early stage
of descent they have not diverged in character from the common
progenitor of the order, nearly so much as they subsequently diverged.
Thus it comes that ancient and extinct genera are often in some slight
degree intermediate in character between their modified descendants, or
between their collateral relations.

In nature the case will be far more complicated than is represented in
the diagram; for the groups will have been more numerous, they will
have endured for extremely unequal lengths of time, and will have been
modified in various degrees. As we possess only the last volume of the
geological record, and that in a very broken condition, we have no
right to expect, except in very rare cases, to fill up wide intervals
in the natural system, and thus unite distinct families or orders. All
that we have a right to expect, is that those groups, which have within
known geological periods undergone much modification, should in the
older formations make some slight approach to each other; so that the
older members should differ less from each other in some of their
characters than do the existing members of the same groups; and this by
the concurrent evidence of our best palæontologists seems frequently to
be the case.

Thus, on the theory of descent with modification, the main facts with
respect to the mutual affinities of the extinct forms of life to each
other and to living forms, seem to me explained in a satisfactory
manner. And they are wholly inexplicable on any other view.

On this same theory, it is evident that the fauna of any great period
in the earth’s history will be intermediate
in general character between that which preceded and that which
succeeded it. Thus, the species which lived at the sixth great stage of
descent in the diagram are the modified offspring of those which lived
at the fifth stage, and are the parents of those which became still
more modified at the seventh stage; hence they could hardly fail to be
nearly intermediate in character between the forms of life above and
below. We must, however, allow for the entire extinction of some
preceding forms, and for the coming in of quite new forms by
immigration, and for a large amount of modification, during the long
and blank intervals between the successive formations. Subject to these
allowances, the fauna of each geological period undoubtedly is
intermediate in character, between the preceding and succeeding faunas.
I need give only one instance, namely, the manner in which the fossils
of the Devonian system, when this system was first discovered, were at
once recognised by palæontologists as intermediate in character between
those of the overlying carboniferous, and underlying Silurian system.
But each fauna is not necessarily exactly intermediate, as unequal
intervals of time have elapsed between consecutive formations.

It is no real objection to the truth of the statement, that the fauna
of each period as a whole is nearly intermediate in character between
the preceding and succeeding faunas, that certain genera offer
exceptions to the rule. For instance, mastodons and elephants, when
arranged by Dr. Falconer in two series, first according to their mutual
affinities and then according to their periods of existence, do not
accord in arrangement. The species extreme in character are not the
oldest, or the most recent; nor are those which are intermediate in
character, intermediate in age. But
supposing for an instant, in this and other such cases, that the record
of the first appearance and disappearance of the species was perfect,
we have no reason to believe that forms successively produced
necessarily endure for corresponding lengths of time: a very ancient
form might occasionally last much longer than a form elsewhere
subsequently produced, especially in the case of terrestrial
productions inhabiting separated districts. To compare small things
with great: if the principal living and extinct races of the domestic
pigeon were arranged as well as they could be in serial affinity, this
arrangement would not closely accord with the order in time of their
production, and still less with the order of their disappearance; for
the parent rock-pigeon now lives; and many varieties between the
rock-pigeon and the carrier have become extinct; and carriers which are
extreme in the important character of length of beak originated earlier
than short-beaked tumblers, which are at the opposite end of the series
in this same respect.

Closely connected with the statement, that the organic remains from an
intermediate formation are in some degree intermediate in character, is
the fact, insisted on by all palæontologists, that fossils from two
consecutive formations are far more closely related to each other, than
are the fossils from two remote formations. Pictet gives as a
well-known instance, the general resemblance of the organic remains
from the several stages of the chalk formation, though the species are
distinct in each stage. This fact alone, from its generality, seems to
have shaken Professor Pictet in his firm belief in the immutability of
species. He who is acquainted with the distribution of existing species
over the globe, will not attempt to account for the close resemblance
of the distinct species in closely consecutive
formations, by the physical conditions of the ancient areas having
remained nearly the same. Let it be remembered that the forms of life,
at least those inhabiting the sea, have changed almost simultaneously
throughout the world, and therefore under the most different climates
and conditions. Consider the prodigious vicissitudes of climate during
the pleistocene period, which includes the whole glacial period, and
note how little the specific forms of the inhabitants of the sea have
been affected.

On the theory of descent, the full meaning of the fact of fossil
remains from closely consecutive formations, though ranked as distinct
species, being closely related, is obvious. As the accumulation of each
formation has often been interrupted, and as long blank intervals have
intervened between successive formations, we ought not to expect to
find, as I attempted to show in the last chapter, in any one or two
formations all the intermediate varieties between the species which
appeared at the commencement and close of these periods; but we ought
to find after intervals, very long as measured by years, but only
moderately long as measured geologically, closely allied forms, or, as
they have been called by some authors, representative species; and
these we assuredly do find. We find, in short, such evidence of the
slow and scarcely sensible mutation of specific forms, as we have a
just right to expect to find.

_On the state of Development of Ancient Forms_.—There has been much
discussion whether recent forms are more highly developed than ancient.
I will not here enter on this subject, for naturalists have not as yet
defined to each other’s satisfaction what is meant by high and low
forms. But in one particular sense the
more recent forms must, on my theory, be higher than the more ancient;
for each new species is formed by having had some advantage in the
struggle for life over other and preceding forms. If under a nearly
similar climate, the eocene inhabitants of one quarter of the world
were put into competition with the existing inhabitants of the same or
some other quarter, the eocene fauna or flora would certainly be beaten
and exterminated; as would a secondary fauna by an eocene, and a
palæozoic fauna by a secondary fauna. I do not doubt that this process
of improvement has affected in a marked and sensible manner the
organisation of the more recent and victorious forms of life, in
comparison with the ancient and beaten forms; but I can see no way of
testing this sort of progress. Crustaceans, for instance, not the
highest in their own class, may have beaten the highest molluscs. From
the extraordinary manner in which European productions have recently
spread over New Zealand, and have seized on places which must have been
previously occupied, we may believe, if all the animals and plants of
Great Britain were set free in New Zealand, that in the course of time
a multitude of British forms would become thoroughly naturalized there,
and would exterminate many of the natives. On the other hand, from what
we see now occurring in New Zealand, and from hardly a single
inhabitant of the southern hemisphere having become wild in any part of
Europe, we may doubt, if all the productions of New Zealand were set
free in Great Britain, whether any considerable number would be enabled
to seize on places now occupied by our native plants and animals. Under
this point of view, the productions of Great Britain may be said to be
higher than those of New Zealand. Yet the most skilful naturalist from
an examination of the species
of the two countries could not have foreseen this result.

Agassiz insists that ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the
embryos of recent animals of the same classes; or that the geological
succession of extinct forms is in some degree parallel to the
embryological development of recent forms. I must follow Pictet and
Huxley in thinking that the truth of this doctrine is very far from
proved. Yet I fully expect to see it hereafter confirmed, at least in
regard to subordinate groups, which have branched off from each other
within comparatively recent times. For this doctrine of Agassiz accords
well with the theory of natural selection. In a future chapter I shall
attempt to show that the adult differs from its embryo, owing to
variations supervening at a not early age, and being inherited at a
corresponding age. This process, whilst it leaves the embryo almost
unaltered, continually adds, in the course of successive generations,
more and more difference to the adult.

Thus the embryo comes to be left as a sort of picture, preserved by
nature, of the ancient and less modified condition of each animal. This
view may be true, and yet it may never be capable of full proof.
Seeing, for instance, that the oldest known mammals, reptiles, and fish
strictly belong to their own proper classes, though some of these old
forms are in a slight degree less distinct from each other than are the
typical members of the same groups at the present day, it would be vain
to look for animals having the common embryological character of the
Vertebrata, until beds far beneath the lowest Silurian strata are
discovered—a discovery of which the chance is very small.

_On the Succession of the same Types within the same
areas, during the later tertiary periods_.—Mr. Clift many years ago
showed that the fossil mammals from the Australian caves were closely
allied to the living marsupials of that continent. In South America, a
similar relationship is manifest, even to an uneducated eye, in the
gigantic pieces of armour like those of the armadillo, found in several
parts of La Plata; and Professor Owen has shown in the most striking
manner that most of the fossil mammals, buried there in such numbers,
are related to South American types. This relationship is even more
clearly seen in the wonderful collection of fossil bones made by MM.
Lund and Clausen in the caves of Brazil. I was so much impressed with
these facts that I strongly insisted, in 1839 and 1845, on this “law of
the succession of types,”—on “this wonderful relationship in the same
continent between the dead and the living.” Professor Owen has
subsequently extended the same generalisation to the mammals of the Old
World. We see the same law in this author’s restorations of the extinct
and gigantic birds of New Zealand. We see it also in the birds of the
caves of Brazil. Mr. Woodward has shown that the same law holds good
with sea-shells, but from the wide distribution of most genera of
molluscs, it is not well displayed by them. Other cases could be added,
as the relation between the extinct and living land-shells of Madeira;
and between the extinct and living brackish-water shells of the
Aralo-Caspian Sea.

Now what does this remarkable law of the succession of the same types
within the same areas mean? He would be a bold man, who after comparing
the present climate of Australia and of parts of South America under
the same latitude, would attempt to account, on the one hand, by
dissimilar physical conditions for the dissimilarity of the inhabitants
of these two continents,
and, on the other hand, by similarity of conditions, for the uniformity
of the same types in each during the later tertiary periods. Nor can it
be pretended that it is an immutable law that marsupials should have
been chiefly or solely produced in Australia; or that Edentata and
other American types should have been solely produced in South America.
For we know that Europe in ancient times was peopled by numerous
marsupials; and I have shown in the publications above alluded to, that
in America the law of distribution of terrestrial mammals was formerly
different from what it now is. North America formerly partook strongly
of the present character of the southern half of the continent; and the
southern half was formerly more closely allied, than it is at present,
to the northern half. In a similar manner we know from Falconer and
Cautley’s discoveries, that northern India was formerly more closely
related in its mammals to Africa than it is at the present time.
Analogous facts could be given in relation to the distribution of
marine animals.

On the theory of descent with modification, the great law of the long
enduring, but not immutable, succession of the same types within the
same areas, is at once explained; for the inhabitants of each quarter
of the world will obviously tend to leave in that quarter, during the
next succeeding period of time, closely allied though in some degree
modified descendants. If the inhabitants of one continent formerly
differed greatly from those of another continent, so will their
modified descendants still differ in nearly the same manner and degree.
But after very long intervals of time and after great geographical
changes, permitting much inter-migration, the feebler will yield to the
more dominant forms, and there will be nothing immutable in the laws of
past and present distribution.


It may be asked in ridicule, whether I suppose that the megatherium and
other allied huge monsters have left behind them in South America the
sloth, armadillo, and anteater, as their degenerate descendants. This
cannot for an instant be admitted. These huge animals have become
wholly extinct, and have left no progeny. But in the caves of Brazil,
there are many extinct species which are closely allied in size and in
other characters to the species still living in South America; and some
of these fossils may be the actual progenitors of living species. It
must not be forgotten that, on my theory, all the species of the same
genus have descended from some one species; so that if six genera, each
having eight species, be found in one geological formation, and in the
next succeeding formation there be six other allied or representative
genera with the same number of species, then we may conclude that only
one species of each of the six older genera has left modified
descendants, constituting the six new genera. The other seven species
of the old genera have all died out and have left no progeny. Or, which
would probably be a far commoner case, two or three species of two or
three alone of the six older genera will have been the parents of the
six new genera; the other old species and the other whole genera having
become utterly extinct. In failing orders, with the genera and species
decreasing in numbers, as apparently is the case of the Edentata of
South America, still fewer genera and species will have left modified
blood-descendants.

_Summary of the preceding and present Chapters_.—I have attempted to
show that the geological record is extremely imperfect; that only a
small portion of the globe has been geologically explored with care;
that only
certain classes of organic beings have been largely preserved in a
fossil state; that the number both of specimens and of species,
preserved in our museums, is absolutely as nothing compared with the
incalculable number of generations which must have passed away even
during a single formation; that, owing to subsidence being necessary
for the accumulation of fossiliferous deposits thick enough to resist
future degradation, enormous intervals of time have elapsed between the
successive formations; that there has probably been more extinction
during the periods of subsidence, and more variation during the periods
of elevation, and during the latter the record will have been least
perfectly kept; that each single formation has not been continuously
deposited; that the duration of each formation is, perhaps, short
compared with the average duration of specific forms; that migration
has played an important part in the first appearance of new forms in
any one area and formation; that widely ranging species are those which
have varied most, and have oftenest given rise to new species; and that
varieties have at first often been local. All these causes taken
conjointly, must have tended to make the geological record extremely
imperfect, and will to a large extent explain why we do not find
interminable varieties, connecting together all the extinct and
existing forms of life by the finest graduated steps.

He who rejects these views on the nature of the geological record, will
rightly reject my whole theory. For he may ask in vain where are the
numberless transitional links which must formerly have connected the
closely allied or representative species, found in the several stages
of the same great formation. He may disbelieve in the enormous
intervals of time which have elapsed between our consecutive
formations; he
may overlook how important a part migration must have played, when the
formations of any one great region alone, as that of Europe, are
considered; he may urge the apparent, but often falsely apparent,
sudden coming in of whole groups of species. He may ask where are the
remains of those infinitely numerous organisms which must have existed
long before the first bed of the Silurian system was deposited: I can
answer this latter question only hypothetically, by saying that as far
as we can see, where our oceans now extend they have for an enormous
period extended, and where our oscillating continents now stand they
have stood ever since the Silurian epoch; but that long before that
period, the world may have presented a wholly different aspect; and
that the older continents, formed of formations older than any known to
us, may now all be in a metamorphosed condition, or may lie buried
under the ocean.

Passing from these difficulties, all the other great leading facts in
palæontology seem to me simply to follow on the theory of descent with
modification through natural selection. We can thus understand how it
is that new species come in slowly and successively; how species of
different classes do not necessarily change together, or at the same
rate, or in the same degree; yet in the long run that all undergo
modification to some extent. The extinction of old forms is the almost
inevitable consequence of the production of new forms. We can
understand why when a species has once disappeared it never reappears.
Groups of species increase in numbers slowly, and endure for unequal
periods of time; for the process of modification is necessarily slow,
and depends on many complex contingencies. The dominant species of the
larger dominant groups tend to leave many modified
descendants, and thus new sub-groups and groups are formed. As these
are formed, the species of the less vigorous groups, from their
inferiority inherited from a common progenitor, tend to become extinct
together, and to leave no modified offspring on the face of the earth.
But the utter extinction of a whole group of species may often be a
very slow process, from the survival of a few descendants, lingering in
protected and isolated situations. When a group has once wholly
disappeared, it does not reappear; for the link of generation has been
broken.

We can understand how the spreading of the dominant forms of life,
which are those that oftenest vary, will in the long run tend to people
the world with allied, but modified, descendants; and these will
generally succeed in taking the places of those groups of species which
are their inferiors in the struggle for existence. Hence, after long
intervals of time, the productions of the world will appear to have
changed simultaneously.

We can understand how it is that all the forms of life, ancient and
recent, make together one grand system; for all are connected by
generation. We can understand, from the continued tendency to
divergence of character, why the more ancient a form is, the more it
generally differs from those now living. Why ancient and extinct forms
often tend to fill up gaps between existing forms, sometimes blending
two groups previously classed as distinct into one; but more commonly
only bringing them a little closer together. The more ancient a form
is, the more often, apparently, it displays characters in some degree
intermediate between groups now distinct; for the more ancient a form
is, the more nearly it will be related to, and consequently resemble,
the common progenitor of groups, since become
widely divergent. Extinct forms are seldom directly intermediate
between existing forms; but are intermediate only by a long and
circuitous course through many extinct and very different forms. We can
clearly see why the organic remains of closely consecutive formations
are more closely allied to each other, than are those of remote
formations; for the forms are more closely linked together by
generation: we can clearly see why the remains of an intermediate
formation are intermediate in character.

The inhabitants of each successive period in the world’s history have
beaten their predecessors in the race for life, and are, in so far,
higher in the scale of nature; and this may account for that vague yet
ill-defined sentiment, felt by many palæontologists, that organisation
on the whole has progressed. If it should hereafter be proved that
ancient animals resemble to a certain extent the embryos of more recent
animals of the same class, the fact will be intelligible. The
succession of the same types of structure within the same areas during
the later geological periods ceases to be mysterious, and is simply
explained by inheritance.

If then the geological record be as imperfect as I believe it to be,
and it may at least be asserted that the record cannot be proved to be
much more perfect, the main objections to the theory of natural
selection are greatly diminished or disappear. On the other hand, all
the chief laws of palæontology plainly proclaim, as it seems to me,
that species have been produced by ordinary generation: old forms
having been supplanted by new and improved forms of life, produced by
the laws of variation still acting round us, and preserved by Natural
Selection.




CHAPTER XI.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION.


Present distribution cannot be accounted for by differences in physical
conditions. Importance of barriers. Affinity of the productions of the
same continent. Centres of creation. Means of dispersal, by changes of
climate and of the level of the land, and by occasional means.
Dispersal during the Glacial period co-extensive with the world.


In considering the distribution of organic beings over the face of the
globe, the first great fact which strikes us is, that neither the
similarity nor the dissimilarity of the inhabitants of various regions
can be accounted for by their climatal and other physical conditions.
Of late, almost every author who has studied the subject has come to
this conclusion. The case of America alone would almost suffice to
prove its truth: for if we exclude the northern parts where the
circumpolar land is almost continuous, all authors agree that one of
the most fundamental divisions in geographical distribution is that
between the New and Old Worlds; yet if we travel over the vast American
continent, from the central parts of the United States to its extreme
southern point, we meet with the most diversified conditions; the most
humid districts, arid deserts, lofty mountains, grassy plains, forests,
marshes, lakes, and great rivers, under almost every temperature. There
is hardly a climate or condition in the Old World which cannot be
paralleled in the New—at least as closely as the same species generally
require; for it is a most rare case to find a group of organisms
confined to any small spot, having conditions peculiar in only a slight
degree; for instance, small areas in the Old World could be pointed out
hotter than any in the New World, yet these are not inhabited by a
peculiar fauna or flora. Notwithstanding this parallelism in the
conditions of the Old and New Worlds, how widely different are their
living productions!

In the southern hemisphere, if we compare large tracts of land in
Australia, South Africa, and western South America, between latitudes
25° and 35°, we shall find parts extremely similar in all their
conditions, yet it would not be possible to point out three faunas and
floras more utterly dissimilar. Or again we may compare the productions
of South America south of lat. 35° with those north of 25°, which
consequently inhabit a considerably different climate, and they will be
found incomparably more closely related to each other, than they are to
the productions of Australia or Africa under nearly the same climate.
Analogous facts could be given with respect to the inhabitants of the
sea.

A second great fact which strikes us in our general review is, that
barriers of any kind, or obstacles to free migration, are related in a
close and important manner to the differences between the productions
of various regions. We see this in the great difference of nearly all
the terrestrial productions of the New and Old Worlds, excepting in the
northern parts, where the land almost joins, and where, under a
slightly different climate, there might have been free migration for
the northern temperate forms, as there now is for the strictly arctic
productions. We see the same fact in the great difference between the
inhabitants of Australia, Africa, and South America under the same
latitude: for these countries are almost as much isolated from each
other as is possible. On each continent, also, we see the same fact;
for on the opposite sides of
lofty and continuous mountain-ranges, and of great deserts, and
sometimes even of large rivers, we find different productions; though
as mountain chains, deserts, etc., are not as impassable, or likely to
have endured so long as the oceans separating continents, the
differences are very inferior in degree to those characteristic of
distinct continents.

Turning to the sea, we find the same law. No two marine faunas are more
distinct, with hardly a fish, shell, or crab in common, than those of
the eastern and western shores of South and Central America; yet these
great faunas are separated only by the narrow, but impassable, isthmus
of Panama. Westward of the shores of America, a wide space of open
ocean extends, with not an island as a halting-place for emigrants;
here we have a barrier of another kind, and as soon as this is passed
we meet in the eastern islands of the Pacific, with another and totally
distinct fauna. So that here three marine faunas range far northward
and southward, in parallel lines not far from each other, under
corresponding climates; but from being separated from each other by
impassable barriers, either of land or open sea, they are wholly
distinct. On the other hand, proceeding still further westward from the
eastern islands of the tropical parts of the Pacific, we encounter no
impassable barriers, and we have innumerable islands as halting-places,
until after travelling over a hemisphere we come to the shores of
Africa; and over this vast space we meet with no well-defined and
distinct marine faunas. Although hardly one shell, crab or fish is
common to the above-named three approximate faunas of Eastern and
Western America and the eastern Pacific islands, yet many fish range
from the Pacific into the Indian Ocean, and many shells are common to
the eastern islands of the Pacific
and the eastern shores of Africa, on almost exactly opposite meridians
of longitude.

A third great fact, partly included in the foregoing statements, is the
affinity of the productions of the same continent or sea, though the
species themselves are distinct at different points and stations. It is
a law of the widest generality, and every continent offers innumerable
instances. Nevertheless the naturalist in travelling, for instance,
from north to south never fails to be struck by the manner in which
successive groups of beings, specifically distinct, yet clearly
related, replace each other. He hears from closely allied, yet distinct
kinds of birds, notes nearly similar, and sees their nests similarly
constructed, but not quite alike, with eggs coloured in nearly the same
manner. The plains near the Straits of Magellan are inhabited by one
species of Rhea (American ostrich), and northward the plains of La
Plata by another species of the same genus; and not by a true ostrich
or emeu, like those found in Africa and Australia under the same
latitude. On these same plains of La Plata, we see the agouti and
bizcacha, animals having nearly the same habits as our hares and
rabbits and belonging to the same order of Rodents, but they plainly
display an American type of structure. We ascend the lofty peaks of the
Cordillera and we find an alpine species of bizcacha; we look to the
waters, and we do not find the beaver or musk-rat, but the coypu and
capybara, rodents of the American type. Innumerable other instances
could be given. If we look to the islands off the American shore,
however much they may differ in geological structure, the inhabitants,
though they may be all peculiar species, are essentially American. We
may look back to past ages, as shown in the last chapter, and we find
American types then prevalent on
the American continent and in the American seas. We see in these facts
some deep organic bond, prevailing throughout space and time, over the
same areas of land and water, and independent of their physical
conditions. The naturalist must feel little curiosity, who is not led
to inquire what this bond is.

This bond, on my theory, is simply inheritance, that cause which alone,
as far as we positively know, produces organisms quite like, or, as we
see in the case of varieties nearly like each other. The dissimilarity
of the inhabitants of different regions may be attributed to
modification through natural selection, and in a quite subordinate
degree to the direct influence of different physical conditions. The
degree of dissimilarity will depend on the migration of the more
dominant forms of life from one region into another having been
effected with more or less ease, at periods more or less remote;—on the
nature and number of the former immigrants;—and on their action and
reaction, in their mutual struggles for life;—the relation of organism
to organism being, as I have already often remarked, the most important
of all relations. Thus the high importance of barriers comes into play
by checking migration; as does time for the slow process of
modification through natural selection. Widely-ranging species,
abounding in individuals, which have already triumphed over many
competitors in their own widely-extended homes will have the best
chance of seizing on new places, when they spread into new countries.
In their new homes they will be exposed to new conditions, and will
frequently undergo further modification and improvement; and thus they
will become still further victorious, and will produce groups of
modified descendants. On this principle of inheritance with
modification, we can understand how it is that sections of genera,
whole genera,
and even families are confined to the same areas, as is so commonly and
notoriously the case.

I believe, as was remarked in the last chapter, in no law of necessary
development. As the variability of each species is an independent
property, and will be taken advantage of by natural selection, only so
far as it profits the individual in its complex struggle for life, so
the degree of modification in different species will be no uniform
quantity. If, for instance, a number of species, which stand in direct
competition with each other, migrate in a body into a new and
afterwards isolated country, they will be little liable to
modification; for neither migration nor isolation in themselves can do
anything. These principles come into play only by bringing organisms
into new relations with each other, and in a lesser degree with the
surrounding physical conditions. As we have seen in the last chapter
that some forms have retained nearly the same character from an
enormously remote geological period, so certain species have migrated
over vast spaces, and have not become greatly modified.

On these views, it is obvious, that the several species of the same
genus, though inhabiting the most distant quarters of the world, must
originally have proceeded from the same source, as they have descended
from the same progenitor. In the case of those species, which have
undergone during whole geological periods but little modification,
there is not much difficulty in believing that they may have migrated
from the same region; for during the vast geographical and climatal
changes which will have supervened since ancient times, almost any
amount of migration is possible. But in many other cases, in which we
have reason to believe that the species of a genus have been produced
within comparatively recent times, there is great difficulty on this
head. It
is also obvious that the individuals of the same species, though now
inhabiting distant and isolated regions, must have proceeded from one
spot, where their parents were first produced: for, as explained in the
last chapter, it is incredible that individuals identically the same
should ever have been produced through natural selection from parents
specifically distinct.

We are thus brought to the question which has been largely discussed by
naturalists, namely, whether species have been created at one or more
points of the earth’s surface. Undoubtedly there are very many cases of
extreme difficulty, in understanding how the same species could
possibly have migrated from some one point to the several distant and
isolated points, where now found. Nevertheless the simplicity of the
view that each species was first produced within a single region
captivates the mind. He who rejects it, rejects the _vera causa_ of
ordinary generation with subsequent migration, and calls in the agency
of a miracle. It is universally admitted, that in most cases the area
inhabited by a species is continuous; and when a plant or animal
inhabits two points so distant from each other, or with an interval of
such a nature, that the space could not be easily passed over by
migration, the fact is given as something remarkable and exceptional.
The capacity of migrating across the sea is more distinctly limited in
terrestrial mammals, than perhaps in any other organic beings; and,
accordingly, we find no inexplicable cases of the same mammal
inhabiting distant points of the world. No geologist will feel any
difficulty in such cases as Great Britain having been formerly united
to Europe, and consequently possessing the same quadrupeds. But if the
same species can be produced at two separate points, why do we not find
a single mammal common to Europe and Australia or South America? The
conditions of life are
nearly the same, so that a multitude of European animals and plants
have become naturalised in America and Australia; and some of the
aboriginal plants are identically the same at these distant points of
the northern and southern hemispheres? The answer, as I believe, is,
that mammals have not been able to migrate, whereas some plants, from
their varied means of dispersal, have migrated across the vast and
broken interspace. The great and striking influence which barriers of
every kind have had on distribution, is intelligible only on the view
that the great majority of species have been produced on one side
alone, and have not been able to migrate to the other side. Some few
families, many sub-families, very many genera, and a still greater
number of sections of genera are confined to a single region; and it
has been observed by several naturalists, that the most natural genera,
or those genera in which the species are most closely related to each
other, are generally local, or confined to one area. What a strange
anomaly it would be, if, when coming one step lower in the series, to
the individuals of the same species, a directly opposite rule
prevailed; and species were not local, but had been produced in two or
more distinct areas!

Hence it seems to me, as it has to many other naturalists, that the
view of each species having been produced in one area alone, and having
subsequently migrated from that area as far as its powers of migration
and subsistence under past and present conditions permitted, is the
most probable. Undoubtedly many cases occur, in which we cannot explain
how the same species could have passed from one point to the other. But
the geographical and climatal changes, which have certainly occurred
within recent geological times, must have interrupted or rendered
discontinuous the formerly continuous range of many species. So that we
are reduced to consider whether the exceptions to
continuity of range are so numerous and of so grave a nature, that we
ought to give up the belief, rendered probable by general
considerations, that each species has been produced within one area,
and has migrated thence as far as it could. It would be hopelessly
tedious to discuss all the exceptional cases of the same species, now
living at distant and separated points; nor do I for a moment pretend
that any explanation could be offered of many such cases. But after
some preliminary remarks, I will discuss a few of the most striking
classes of facts; namely, the existence of the same species on the
summits of distant mountain-ranges, and at distant points in the arctic
and antarctic regions; and secondly (in the following chapter), the
wide distribution of freshwater productions; and thirdly, the
occurrence of the same terrestrial species on islands and on the
mainland, though separated by hundreds of miles of open sea. If the
existence of the same species at distant and isolated points of the
earth’s surface, can in many instances be explained on the view of each
species having migrated from a single birthplace; then, considering our
ignorance with respect to former climatal and geographical changes and
various occasional means of transport, the belief that this has been
the universal law, seems to me incomparably the safest.

In discussing this subject, we shall be enabled at the same time to
consider a point equally important for us, namely, whether the several
distinct species of a genus, which on my theory have all descended from
a common progenitor, can have migrated (undergoing modification during
some part of their migration) from the area inhabited by their
progenitor. If it can be shown to be almost invariably the case, that a
region, of which most of its inhabitants are closely related to, or
belong to the same genera with the species of a second region,
has probably received at some former period immigrants from this other
region, my theory will be strengthened; for we can clearly understand,
on the principle of modification, why the inhabitants of a region
should be related to those of another region, whence it has been
stocked. A volcanic island, for instance, upheaved and formed at the
distance of a few hundreds of miles from a continent, would probably
receive from it in the course of time a few colonists, and their
descendants, though modified, would still be plainly related by
inheritance to the inhabitants of the continent. Cases of this nature
are common, and are, as we shall hereafter more fully see, inexplicable
on the theory of independent creation. This view of the relation of
species in one region to those in another, does not differ much (by
substituting the word variety for species) from that lately advanced in
an ingenious paper by Mr. Wallace, in which he concludes, that “every
species has come into existence coincident both in space and time with
a pre-existing closely allied species.” And I now know from
correspondence, that this coincidence he attributes to generation with
modification.

The previous remarks on “single and multiple centres of creation” do
not directly bear on another allied question,—namely whether all the
individuals of the same species have descended from
a single pair, or single hermaphrodite, or whether, as some authors
suppose, from many individuals simultaneously created. With those
organic beings which never intercross (if such exist), the species, on
my theory, must have descended from a succession of improved varieties,
which will never have blended with other individuals or varieties, but
will have supplanted each other; so that, at each successive stage of
modification and improvement, all the individuals of each variety will
have descended from a single parent. But in the majority of cases,
namely, with all organisms which habitually unite for each birth, or
which often intercross, I believe that during the slow process of
modification the individuals of the species will have been kept nearly
uniform by intercrossing; so that many individuals will have gone on
simultaneously changing, and the whole amount of modification will not
have been due, at each stage, to descent from a single parent. To
illustrate what I mean: our English racehorses differ slightly from the
horses of every other breed; but they do not owe their difference and
superiority to descent from any single pair, but to continued care in
selecting and training many individuals during many generations.

Before discussing the three classes of facts, which I have selected as
presenting the greatest amount of difficulty on the theory of “single
centres of creation,” I must say a few words on the means of dispersal.

_Means of Dispersal_.—Sir C. Lyell and other authors have ably treated
this subject. I can give here only the briefest abstract of the more
important facts. Change of climate must have had a powerful influence
on migration: a region when its climate was different may have been a
high road for migration, but now be impassable; I shall, however,
presently have to discuss this branch of the subject in some detail.
Changes of level in the land must also have been highly influential: a
narrow isthmus now separates two marine faunas; submerge it, or let it
formerly have been submerged, and the two faunas will now blend or may
formerly have blended: where the sea now extends, land may at a former
period have connected islands or possibly even continents together, and
thus have allowed terrestrial productions to pass from one to the
other.
No geologist will dispute that great mutations of level have occurred
within the period of existing organisms. Edward Forbes insisted that
all the islands in the Atlantic must recently have been connected with
Europe or Africa, and Europe likewise with America. Other authors have
thus hypothetically bridged over every ocean, and have united almost
every island to some mainland. If indeed the arguments used by Forbes
are to be trusted, it must be admitted that scarcely a single island
exists which has not recently been united to some continent. This view
cuts the Gordian knot of the dispersal of the same species to the most
distant points, and removes many a difficulty: but to the best of my
judgment we are not authorized in admitting such enormous geographical
changes within the period of existing species. It seems to me that we
have abundant evidence of great oscillations of level in our
continents; but not of such vast changes in their position and
extension, as to have united them within the recent period to each
other and to the several intervening oceanic islands. I freely admit
the former existence of many islands, now buried beneath the sea, which
may have served as halting places for plants and for many animals
during their migration. In the coral-producing oceans such sunken
islands are now marked, as I believe, by rings of coral or atolls
standing over them. Whenever it is fully admitted, as I believe it will
some day be, that each species has proceeded from a single birthplace,
and when in the course of time we know something definite about the
means of distribution, we shall be enabled to speculate with security
on the former extension of the land. But I do not believe that it will
ever be proved that within the recent period continents which are now
quite separate, have been continuously, or almost continuously, united
with each other, and with the many existing oceanic islands. Several
facts in distribution,—such as the great difference in the marine
faunas on the opposite sides of almost every continent,—the close
relation of the tertiary inhabitants of several lands and even seas to
their present inhabitants,—a certain degree of relation (as we shall
hereafter see) between the distribution of mammals and the depth of the
sea,—these and other such facts seem to me opposed to the admission of
such prodigious geographical revolutions within the recent period, as
are necessitated on the view advanced by Forbes and admitted by his
many followers. The nature and relative proportions of the inhabitants
of oceanic islands likewise seem to me opposed to the belief of their
former continuity with continents. Nor does their almost universally
volcanic composition favour the admission that they are the wrecks of
sunken continents;—if they had originally existed as mountain-ranges on
the land, some at least of the islands would have been formed, like
other mountain-summits, of granite, metamorphic schists, old
fossiliferous or other such rocks, instead of consisting of mere piles
of volcanic matter.

I must now say a few words on what are called accidental means, but
which more properly might be called occasional means of distribution. I
shall here confine myself to plants. In botanical works, this or that
plant is stated to be ill adapted for wide dissemination; but for
transport across the sea, the greater or less facilities may be said to
be almost wholly unknown. Until I tried, with Mr. Berkeley’s aid, a few
experiments, it was not even known how far seeds could resist the
injurious action of sea-water. To my surprise I found that out of 87
kinds, 64 germinated after an immersion of 28 days, and a few survived
an immersion of 137 days.
For convenience sake I chiefly tried small seeds, without the capsule
or fruit; and as all of these sank in a few days, they could not be
floated across wide spaces of the sea, whether or not they were injured
by the salt-water. Afterwards I tried some larger fruits, capsules,
etc., and some of these floated for a long time. It is well known what
a difference there is in the buoyancy of green and seasoned timber; and
it occurred to me that floods might wash down plants or branches, and
that these might be dried on the banks, and then by a fresh rise in the
stream be washed into the sea. Hence I was led to dry stems and
branches of 94 plants with ripe fruit, and to place them on sea water.
The majority sank quickly, but some which whilst green floated for a
very short time, when dried floated much longer; for instance, ripe
hazel-nuts sank immediately, but when dried, they floated for 90 days
and afterwards when planted they germinated; an asparagus plant with
ripe berries floated for 23 days, when dried it floated for 85 days,
and the seeds afterwards germinated: the ripe seeds of Helosciadium
sank in two days, when dried they floated for above 90 days, and
afterwards germinated. Altogether out of the 94 dried plants, 18
floated for above 28 days, and some of the 18 floated for a very much
longer period. So that as 64/87 seeds germinated after an immersion of
28 days; and as 18/94 plants with ripe fruit (but not all the same
species as in the foregoing experiment) floated, after being dried, for
above 28 days, as far as we may infer anything from these scanty facts,
we may conclude that the seeds of 14/100 plants of any country might be
floated by sea-currents during 28 days, and would retain their power of
germination. In Johnston’s Physical Atlas, the average rate of the
several Atlantic currents is 33 miles per diem (some currents running
at the rate of 60 miles
per diem); on this average, the seeds of 14/100 plants belonging to one
country might be floated across 924 miles of sea to another country;
and when stranded, if blown to a favourable spot by an inland gale,
they would germinate.

Subsequently to my experiments, M. Martens tried similar ones, but in a
much better manner, for he placed the seeds in a box in the actual sea,
so that they were alternately wet and exposed to the air like really
floating plants. He tried 98 seeds, mostly different from mine; but he
chose many large fruits and likewise seeds from plants which live near
the sea; and this would have favoured the average length of their
flotation and of their resistance to the injurious action of the
salt-water. On the other hand he did not previously dry the plants or
branches with the fruit; and this, as we have seen, would have caused
some of them to have floated much longer. The result was that 18/98 of
his seeds floated for 42 days, and were then capable of germination.
But I do not doubt that plants exposed to the waves would float for a
less time than those protected from violent movement as in our
experiments. Therefore it would perhaps be safer to assume that the
seeds of about 10/100 plants of a flora, after having been dried, could
be floated across a space of sea 900 miles in width, and would then
germinate. The fact of the larger fruits often floating longer than the
small, is interesting; as plants with large seeds or fruit could hardly
be transported by any other means; and Alph. de Candolle has shown that
such plants generally have restricted ranges.

But seeds may be occasionally transported in another manner. Drift
timber is thrown up on most islands, even on those in the midst of the
widest oceans; and the natives of the coral-islands in the Pacific,
procure
stones for their tools, solely from the roots of drifted trees, these
stones being a valuable royal tax. I find on examination, that when
irregularly shaped stones are embedded in the roots of trees, small
parcels of earth are very frequently enclosed in their interstices and
behind them,—so perfectly that not a particle could be washed away in
the longest transport: out of one small portion of earth thus
_completely_ enclosed by wood in an oak about 50 years old, three
dicotyledonous plants germinated: I am certain of the accuracy of this
observation. Again, I can show that the carcasses of birds, when
floating on the sea, sometimes escape being immediately devoured; and
seeds of many kinds in the crops of floating birds long retain their
vitality: peas and vetches, for instance, are killed by even a few
days’ immersion in sea-water; but some taken out of the crop of a
pigeon, which had floated on artificial salt-water for 30 days, to my
surprise nearly all germinated.

Living birds can hardly fail to be highly effective agents in the
transportation of seeds. I could give many facts showing how frequently
birds of many kinds are blown by gales to vast distances across the
ocean. We may I think safely assume that under such circumstances their
rate of flight would often be 35 miles an hour; and some authors have
given a far higher estimate. I have never seen an instance of
nutritious seeds passing through the intestines of a bird; but hard
seeds of fruit will pass uninjured through even the digestive organs of
a turkey. In the course of two months, I picked up in my garden 12
kinds of seeds, out of the excrement of small birds, and these seemed
perfect, and some of them, which I tried, germinated. But the following
fact is more important: the crops of birds do not secrete gastric
juice, and do not in the
least injure, as I know by trial, the germination of seeds; now after a
bird has found and devoured a large supply of food, it is positively
asserted that all the grains do not pass into the gizzard for 12 or
even 18 hours. A bird in this interval might easily be blown to the
distance of 500 miles, and hawks are known to look out for tired birds,
and the contents of their torn crops might thus readily get scattered.
Mr. Brent informs me that a friend of his had to give up flying
carrier-pigeons from France to England, as the hawks on the English
coast destroyed so many on their arrival. Some hawks and owls bolt
their prey whole, and after an interval of from twelve to twenty hours,
disgorge pellets, which, as I know from experiments made in the
Zoological Gardens, include seeds capable of germination. Some seeds of
the oat, wheat, millet, canary, hemp, clover, and beet germinated after
having been from twelve to twenty-one hours in the stomachs of
different birds of prey; and two seeds of beet grew after having been
thus retained for two days and fourteen hours. Freshwater fish, I find,
eat seeds of many land and water plants: fish are frequently devoured
by birds, and thus the seeds might be transported from place to place.
I forced many kinds of seeds into the stomachs of dead fish, and then
gave their bodies to fishing-eagles, storks, and pelicans; these birds
after an interval of many hours, either rejected the seeds in pellets
or passed them in their excrement; and several of these seeds retained
their power of germination. Certain seeds, however, were always killed
by this process.

Although the beaks and feet of birds are generally quite clean, I can
show that earth sometimes adheres to them: in one instance I removed
twenty-two grains of dry argillaceous earth from one foot of a
partridge, and in this earth there was a pebble quite as large as
the seed of a vetch. Thus seeds might occasionally be transported to
great distances; for many facts could be given showing that soil almost
everywhere is charged with seeds. Reflect for a moment on the millions
of quails which annually cross the Mediterranean; and can we doubt that
the earth adhering to their feet would sometimes include a few minute
seeds? But I shall presently have to recur to this subject.

As icebergs are known to be sometimes loaded with earth and stones, and
have even carried brushwood, bones, and the nest of a land-bird, I can
hardly doubt that they must occasionally have transported seeds from
one part to another of the arctic and antarctic regions, as suggested
by Lyell; and during the Glacial period from one part of the now
temperate regions to another. In the Azores, from the large number of
the species of plants common to Europe, in comparison with the plants
of other oceanic islands nearer to the mainland, and (as remarked by
Mr. H. C. Watson) from the somewhat northern character of the flora in
comparison with the latitude, I suspected that these islands had been
partly stocked by ice-borne seeds, during the Glacial epoch. At my
request Sir C. Lyell wrote to M. Hartung to inquire whether he had
observed erratic boulders on these islands, and he answered that he had
found large fragments of granite and other rocks, which do not occur in
the archipelago. Hence we may safely infer that icebergs formerly
landed their rocky burthens on the shores of these mid-ocean islands,
and it is at least possible that they may have brought thither the
seeds of northern plants.

Considering that the several above means of transport, and that several
other means, which without doubt remain to be discovered, have been in
action year after year, for centuries and tens of thousands of
years, it would I think be a marvellous fact if many plants had not
thus become widely transported. These means of transport are sometimes
called accidental, but this is not strictly correct: the currents of
the sea are not accidental, nor is the direction of prevalent gales of
wind. It should be observed that scarcely any means of transport would
carry seeds for very great distances; for seeds do not retain their
vitality when exposed for a great length of time to the action of
seawater; nor could they be long carried in the crops or intestines of
birds. These means, however, would suffice for occasional transport
across tracts of sea some hundred miles in breadth, or from island to
island, or from a continent to a neighbouring island, but not from one
distant continent to another. The floras of distant continents would
not by such means become mingled in any great degree; but would remain
as distinct as we now see them to be. The currents, from their course,
would never bring seeds from North America to Britain, though they
might and do bring seeds from the West Indies to our western shores,
where, if not killed by so long an immersion in salt-water, they could
not endure our climate. Almost every year, one or two land-birds are
blown across the whole Atlantic Ocean, from North America to the
western shores of Ireland and England; but seeds could be transported
by these wanderers only by one means, namely, in dirt sticking to their
feet, which is in itself a rare accident. Even in this case, how small
would the chance be of a seed falling on favourable soil, and coming to
maturity! But it would be a great error to argue that because a
well-stocked island, like Great Britain, has not, as far as is known
(and it would be very difficult to prove this), received within the
last few centuries, through occasional means
of transport, immigrants from Europe or any other continent, that a
poorly-stocked island, though standing more remote from the mainland,
would not receive colonists by similar means. I do not doubt that out
of twenty seeds or animals transported to an island, even if far less
well-stocked than Britain, scarcely more than one would be so well
fitted to its new home, as to become naturalised. But this, as it seems
to me, is no valid argument against what would be effected by
occasional means of transport, during the long lapse of geological
time, whilst an island was being upheaved and formed, and before it had
become fully stocked with inhabitants. On almost bare land, with few or
no destructive insects or birds living there, nearly every seed, which
chanced to arrive, would be sure to germinate and survive.

_Dispersal during the Glacial period_.—The identity of many plants and
animals, on mountain-summits, separated from each other by hundreds of
miles of lowlands, where the Alpine species could not possibly exist,
is one of the most striking cases known of the same species living at
distant points, without the apparent possibility of their having
migrated from one to the other. It is indeed a remarkable fact to see
so many of the same plants living on the snowy regions of the Alps or
Pyrenees, and in the extreme northern parts of Europe; but it is far
more remarkable, that the plants on the White Mountains, in the United
States of America, are all the same with those of Labrador, and nearly
all the same, as we hear from Asa Gray, with those on the loftiest
mountains of Europe. Even as long ago as 1747, such facts led Gmelin to
conclude that the same species must have been independently created at
several distinct points; and we might have remained
in this same belief, had not Agassiz and others called vivid attention
to the Glacial period, which, as we shall immediately see, affords a
simple explanation of these facts. We have evidence of almost every
conceivable kind, organic and inorganic, that within a very recent
geological period, central Europe and North America suffered under an
Arctic climate. The ruins of a house burnt by fire do not tell their
tale more plainly, than do the mountains of Scotland and Wales, with
their scored flanks, polished surfaces, and perched boulders, of the
icy streams with which their valleys were lately filled. So greatly has
the climate of Europe changed, that in Northern Italy, gigantic
moraines, left by old glaciers, are now clothed by the vine and maize.
Throughout a large part of the United States, erratic boulders, and
rocks scored by drifted icebergs and coast-ice, plainly reveal a former
cold period.

The former influence of the glacial climate on the distribution of the
inhabitants of Europe, as explained with remarkable clearness by Edward
Forbes, is substantially as follows. But we shall follow the changes
more readily, by supposing a new glacial period to come slowly on, and
then pass away, as formerly occurred. As the cold came on, and as each
more southern zone became fitted for arctic beings and ill-fitted for
their former more temperate inhabitants, the latter would be supplanted
and arctic productions would take their places. The inhabitants of the
more temperate regions would at the same time travel southward, unless
they were stopped by barriers, in which case they would perish. The
mountains would become covered with snow and ice, and their former
Alpine inhabitants would descend to the plains. By the time that the
cold had reached its maximum, we should have a uniform arctic fauna and
flora, covering the central parts of Europe, as far
south as the Alps and Pyrenees, and even stretching into Spain. The now
temperate regions of the United States would likewise be covered by
arctic plants and animals, and these would be nearly the same with
those of Europe; for the present circumpolar inhabitants, which we
suppose to have everywhere travelled southward, are remarkably uniform
round the world. We may suppose that the Glacial period came on a
little earlier or later in North America than in Europe, so will the
southern migration there have been a little earlier or later; but this
will make no difference in the final result.

As the warmth returned, the arctic forms would retreat northward,
closely followed up in their retreat by the productions of the more
temperate regions. And as the snow melted from the bases of the
mountains, the arctic forms would seize on the cleared and thawed
ground, always ascending higher and higher, as the warmth increased,
whilst their brethren were pursuing their northern journey. Hence, when
the warmth had fully returned, the same arctic species, which had
lately lived in a body together on the lowlands of the Old and New
Worlds, would be left isolated on distant mountain-summits (having been
exterminated on all lesser heights) and in the arctic regions of both
hemispheres.

Thus we can understand the identity of many plants at points so
immensely remote as on the mountains of the United States and of
Europe. We can thus also understand the fact that the Alpine plants of
each mountain-range are more especially related to the arctic forms
living due north or nearly due north of them: for the migration as the
cold came on, and the re-migration on the returning warmth, will
generally have been due south and north. The Alpine plants, for
example, of Scotland, as remarked by Mr. H. C. Watson,
and those of the Pyrenees, as remarked by Ramond, are more especially
allied to the plants of northern Scandinavia; those of the United
States to Labrador; those of the mountains of Siberia to the arctic
regions of that country. These views, grounded as they are on the
perfectly well-ascertained occurrence of a former Glacial period, seem
to me to explain in so satisfactory a manner the present distribution
of the Alpine and Arctic productions of Europe and America, that when
in other regions we find the same species on distant mountain-summits,
we may almost conclude without other evidence, that a colder climate
permitted their former migration across the low intervening tracts,
since become too warm for their existence.

If the climate, since the Glacial period, has ever been in any degree
warmer than at present (as some geologists in the United States believe
to have been the case, chiefly from the distribution of the fossil
Gnathodon), then the arctic and temperate productions will at a very
late period have marched a little further north, and subsequently have
retreated to their present homes; but I have met with no satisfactory
evidence with respect to this intercalated slightly warmer period,
since the Glacial period.

The arctic forms, during their long southern migration and re-migration
northward, will have been exposed to nearly the same climate, and, as
is especially to be noticed, they will have kept in a body together;
consequently their mutual relations will not have been much disturbed,
and, in accordance with the principles inculcated in this volume, they
will not have been liable to much modification. But with our Alpine
productions, left isolated from the moment of the returning warmth,
first at the bases and ultimately on the summits of the mountains, the
case will have been somewhat different;
for it is not likely that all the same arctic species will have been
left on mountain ranges distant from each other, and have survived
there ever since; they will, also, in all probability have become
mingled with ancient Alpine species, which must have existed on the
mountains before the commencement of the Glacial epoch, and which
during its coldest period will have been temporarily driven down to the
plains; they will, also, have been exposed to somewhat different
climatal influences. Their mutual relations will thus have been in some
degree disturbed; consequently they will have been liable to
modification; and this we find has been the case; for if we compare the
present Alpine plants and animals of the several great European
mountain-ranges, though very many of the species are identically the
same, some present varieties, some are ranked as doubtful forms, and
some few are distinct yet closely allied or representative species.

In illustrating what, as I believe, actually took place during the
Glacial period, I assumed that at its commencement the arctic
productions were as uniform round the polar regions as they are at the
present day. But the foregoing remarks on distribution apply not only
to strictly arctic forms, but also to many sub-arctic and to some few
northern temperate forms, for some of these are the same on the lower
mountains and on the plains of North America and Europe; and it may be
reasonably asked how I account for the necessary degree of uniformity
of the sub-arctic and northern temperate forms round the world, at the
commencement of the Glacial period. At the present day, the sub-arctic
and northern temperate productions of the Old and New Worlds are
separated from each other by the Atlantic Ocean and by the extreme
northern part of the Pacific. During the Glacial period, when the
inhabitants
of the Old and New Worlds lived further southwards than at present,
they must have been still more completely separated by wider spaces of
ocean. I believe the above difficulty may be surmounted by looking to
still earlier changes of climate of an opposite nature. We have good
reason to believe that during the newer Pliocene period, before the
Glacial epoch, and whilst the majority of the inhabitants of the world
were specifically the same as now, the climate was warmer than at the
present day. Hence we may suppose that the organisms now living under
the climate of latitude 60°, during the Pliocene period lived further
north under the Polar Circle, in latitude 66°-67°; and that the
strictly arctic productions then lived on the broken land still nearer
to the pole. Now if we look at a globe, we shall see that under the
Polar Circle there is almost continuous land from western Europe,
through Siberia, to eastern America. And to this continuity of the
circumpolar land, and to the consequent freedom for intermigration
under a more favourable climate, I attribute the necessary amount of
uniformity in the sub-arctic and northern temperate productions of the
Old and New Worlds, at a period anterior to the Glacial epoch.

Believing, from reasons before alluded to, that our continents have
long remained in nearly the same relative position, though subjected to
large, but partial oscillations of level, I am strongly inclined to
extend the above view, and to infer that during some earlier and still
warmer period, such as the older Pliocene period, a large number of the
same plants and animals inhabited the almost continuous circumpolar
land; and that these plants and animals, both in the Old and New
Worlds, began slowly to migrate southwards as the climate became less
warm, long before the commencement
of the Glacial period. We now see, as I believe, their descendants,
mostly in a modified condition, in the central parts of Europe and the
United States. On this view we can understand the relationship, with
very little identity, between the productions of North America and
Europe,—a relationship which is most remarkable, considering the
distance of the two areas, and their separation by the Atlantic Ocean.
We can further understand the singular fact remarked on by several
observers, that the productions of Europe and America during the later
tertiary stages were more closely related to each other than they are
at the present time; for during these warmer periods the northern parts
of the Old and New Worlds will have been almost continuously united by
land, serving as a bridge, since rendered impassable by cold, for the
inter-migration of their inhabitants.

During the slowly decreasing warmth of the Pliocene period, as soon as
the species in common, which inhabited the New and Old Worlds, migrated
south of the Polar Circle, they must have been completely cut off from
each other. This separation, as far as the more temperate productions
are concerned, took place long ages ago. And as the plants and animals
migrated southward, they will have become mingled in the one great
region with the native American productions, and have had to compete
with them; and in the other great region, with those of the Old World.
Consequently we have here everything favourable for much
modification,—for far more modification than with the Alpine
productions, left isolated, within a much more recent period, on the
several mountain-ranges and on the arctic lands of the two Worlds.
Hence it has come, that when we compare the now living productions of
the temperate regions of the New and Old Worlds, we find very few
identical
species (though Asa Gray has lately shown that more plants are
identical than was formerly supposed), but we find in every great class
many forms, which some naturalists rank as geographical races, and
others as distinct species; and a host of closely allied or
representative forms which are ranked by all naturalists as
specifically distinct.

As on the land, so in the waters of the sea, a slow southern migration
of a marine fauna, which during the Pliocene or even a somewhat earlier
period, was nearly uniform along the continuous shores of the Polar
Circle, will account, on the theory of modification, for many closely
allied forms now living in areas completely sundered. Thus, I think, we
can understand the presence of many existing and tertiary
representative forms on the eastern and western shores of temperate
North America; and the still more striking case of many closely allied
crustaceans (as described in Dana’s admirable work), of some fish and
other marine animals, in the Mediterranean and in the seas of
Japan,—areas now separated by a continent and by nearly a hemisphere of
equatorial ocean.

These cases of relationship, without identity, of the inhabitants of
seas now disjoined, and likewise of the past and present inhabitants of
the temperate lands of North America and Europe, are inexplicable on
the theory of creation. We cannot say that they have been created
alike, in correspondence with the nearly similar physical conditions of
the areas; for if we compare, for instance, certain parts of South
America with the southern continents of the Old World, we see countries
closely corresponding in all their physical conditions, but with their
inhabitants utterly dissimilar.

But we must return to our more immediate subject, the Glacial period. I
am convinced that Forbes’s view
may be largely extended. In Europe we have the plainest evidence of the
cold period, from the western shores of Britain to the Oural range, and
southward to the Pyrenees. We may infer, from the frozen mammals and
nature of the mountain vegetation, that Siberia was similarly affected.
Along the Himalaya, at points 900 miles apart, glaciers have left the
marks of their former low descent; and in Sikkim, Dr. Hooker saw maize
growing on gigantic ancient moraines. South of the equator, we have
some direct evidence of former glacial action in New Zealand; and the
same plants, found on widely separated mountains in this island, tell
the same story. If one account which has been published can be trusted,
we have direct evidence of glacial action in the south-eastern corner
of Australia.

Looking to America; in the northern half, ice-borne fragments of rock
have been observed on the eastern side as far south as lat. 36°-37°,
and on the shores of the Pacific, where the climate is now so
different, as far south as lat. 46 deg; erratic boulders have, also,
been noticed on the Rocky Mountains. In the Cordillera of Equatorial
South America, glaciers once extended far below their present level. In
central Chile I was astonished at the structure of a vast mound of
detritus, about 800 feet in height, crossing a valley of the Andes; and
this I now feel convinced was a gigantic moraine, left far below any
existing glacier. Further south on both sides of the continent, from
lat. 41° to the southernmost extremity, we have the clearest evidence
of former glacial action, in huge boulders transported far from their
parent source.

We do not know that the Glacial epoch was strictly simultaneous at
these several far distant points on opposite sides of the world. But we
have good evidence in almost every case, that the epoch was included
within
the latest geological period. We have, also, excellent evidence, that
it endured for an enormous time, as measured by years, at each point.
The cold may have come on, or have ceased, earlier at one point of the
globe than at another, but seeing that it endured for long at each, and
that it was contemporaneous in a geological sense, it seems to me
probable that it was, during a part at least of the period, actually
simultaneous throughout the world. Without some distinct evidence to
the contrary, we may at least admit as probable that the glacial action
was simultaneous on the eastern and western sides of North America, in
the Cordillera under the equator and under the warmer temperate zones,
and on both sides of the southern extremity of the continent. If this
be admitted, it is difficult to avoid believing that the temperature of
the whole world was at this period simultaneously cooler. But it would
suffice for my purpose, if the temperature was at the same time lower
along certain broad belts of longitude.

On this view of the whole world, or at least of broad longitudinal
belts, having been simultaneously colder from pole to pole, much light
can be thrown on the present distribution of identical and allied
species. In America, Dr. Hooker has shown that between forty and fifty
of the flowering plants of Tierra del Fuego, forming no inconsiderable
part of its scanty flora, are common to Europe, enormously remote as
these two points are; and there are many closely allied species. On the
lofty mountains of equatorial America a host of peculiar species
belonging to European genera occur. On the highest mountains of Brazil,
some few European genera were found by Gardner, which do not exist in
the wide intervening hot countries. So on the Silla of Caraccas the
illustrious Humboldt long ago found species belonging
to genera characteristic of the Cordillera. On the mountains of
Abyssinia, several European forms and some few representatives of the
peculiar flora of the Cape of Good Hope occur. At the Cape of Good Hope
a very few European species, believed not to have been introduced by
man, and on the mountains, some few representative European forms are
found, which have not been discovered in the intertropical parts of
Africa. On the Himalaya, and on the isolated mountain-ranges of the
peninsula of India, on the heights of Ceylon, and on the volcanic cones
of Java, many plants occur, either identically the same or representing
each other, and at the same time representing plants of Europe, not
found in the intervening hot lowlands. A list of the genera collected
on the loftier peaks of Java raises a picture of a collection made on a
hill in Europe! Still more striking is the fact that southern
Australian forms are clearly represented by plants growing on the
summits of the mountains of Borneo. Some of these Australian forms, as
I hear from Dr. Hooker, extend along the heights of the peninsula of
Malacca, and are thinly scattered, on the one hand over India and on
the other as far north as Japan.

On the southern mountains of Australia, Dr. F. Müller has discovered
several European species; other species, not introduced by man, occur
on the lowlands; and a long list can be given, as I am informed by Dr.
Hooker, of European genera, found in Australia, but not in the
intermediate torrid regions. In the admirable ‘Introduction to the
Flora of New Zealand,’ by Dr. Hooker, analogous and striking facts are
given in regard to the plants of that large island. Hence we see that
throughout the world, the plants growing on the more lofty mountains,
and on the temperate lowlands of the northern and southern hemispheres,
are sometimes
identically the same; but they are much oftener specifically distinct,
though related to each other in a most remarkable manner.

This brief abstract applies to plants alone: some strictly analogous
facts could be given on the distribution of terrestrial animals. In
marine productions, similar cases occur; as an example, I may quote a
remark by the highest authority, Professor Dana, that “it is certainly
a wonderful fact that New Zealand should have a closer resemblance in
its crustacea to Great Britain, its antipode, than to any other part of
the world.” Sir J. Richardson, also, speaks of the reappearance on the
shores of New Zealand, Tasmania, etc., of northern forms of fish. Dr.
Hooker informs me that twenty-five species of Algæ are common to New
Zealand and to Europe, but have not been found in the intermediate
tropical seas.

It should be observed that the northern species and forms found in the
southern parts of the southern hemisphere, and on the mountain-ranges
of the intertropical regions, are not arctic, but belong to the
northern temperate zones. As Mr. H. C. Watson has recently remarked,
“In receding from polar towards equatorial latitudes, the Alpine or
mountain floras really become less and less arctic.” Many of the forms
living on the mountains of the warmer regions of the earth and in the
southern hemisphere are of doubtful value, being ranked by some
naturalists as specifically distinct, by others as varieties; but some
are certainly identical, and many, though closely related to northern
forms, must be ranked as distinct species.

Now let us see what light can be thrown on the foregoing facts, on the
belief, supported as it is by a large body of geological evidence, that
the whole world, or a large part of it, was during the Glacial period
simultaneously much
colder than at present. The Glacial period, as measured by years, must
have been very long; and when we remember over what vast spaces some
naturalised plants and animals have spread within a few centuries, this
period will have been ample for any amount of migration. As the cold
came slowly on, all the tropical plants and other productions will have
retreated from both sides towards the equator, followed in the rear by
the temperate productions, and these by the arctic; but with the latter
we are not now concerned. The tropical plants probably suffered much
extinction; how much no one can say; perhaps formerly the tropics
supported as many species as we see at the present day crowded together
at the Cape of Good Hope, and in parts of temperate Australia. As we
know that many tropical plants and animals can withstand a considerable
amount of cold, many might have escaped extermination during a moderate
fall of temperature, more especially by escaping into the warmest
spots. But the great fact to bear in mind is, that all tropical
productions will have suffered to a certain extent. On the other hand,
the temperate productions, after migrating nearer to the equator,
though they will have been placed under somewhat new conditions, will
have suffered less. And it is certain that many temperate plants, if
protected from the inroads of competitors, can withstand a much warmer
climate than their own. Hence, it seems to me possible, bearing in mind
that the tropical productions were in a suffering state and could not
have presented a firm front against intruders, that a certain number of
the more vigorous and dominant temperate forms might have penetrated
the native ranks and have reached or even crossed the equator. The
invasion would, of course, have been greatly favoured by high land, and
perhaps
by a dry climate; for Dr. Falconer informs me that it is the damp with
the heat of the tropics which is so destructive to perennial plants
from a temperate climate. On the other hand, the most humid and hottest
districts will have afforded an asylum to the tropical natives. The
mountain-ranges north-west of the Himalaya, and the long line of the
Cordillera, seem to have afforded two great lines of invasion: and it
is a striking fact, lately communicated to me by Dr. Hooker, that all
the flowering plants, about forty-six in number, common to Tierra del
Fuego and to Europe still exist in North America, which must have lain
on the line of march. But I do not doubt that some temperate
productions entered and crossed even the _lowlands_ of the tropics at
the period when the cold was most intense,—when arctic forms had
migrated some twenty-five degrees of latitude from their native country
and covered the land at the foot of the Pyrenees. At this period of
extreme cold, I believe that the climate under the equator at the level
of the sea was about the same with that now felt there at the height of
six or seven thousand feet. During this the coldest period, I suppose
that large spaces of the tropical lowlands were clothed with a mingled
tropical and temperate vegetation, like that now growing with strange
luxuriance at the base of the Himalaya, as graphically described by
Hooker.

Thus, as I believe, a considerable number of plants, a few terrestrial
animals, and some marine productions, migrated during the Glacial
period from the northern and southern temperate zones into the
intertropical regions, and some even crossed the equator. As the warmth
returned, these temperate forms would naturally ascend the higher
mountains, being exterminated on the lowlands; those which had not
reached the equator, would re-migrate northward or southward towards
their former
homes; but the forms, chiefly northern, which had crossed the equator,
would travel still further from their homes into the more temperate
latitudes of the opposite hemisphere. Although we have reason to
believe from geological evidence that the whole body of arctic shells
underwent scarcely any modification during their long southern
migration and re-migration northward, the case may have been wholly
different with those intruding forms which settled themselves on the
intertropical mountains, and in the southern hemisphere. These being
surrounded by strangers will have had to compete with many new forms of
life; and it is probable that selected modifications in their
structure, habits, and constitutions will have profited them. Thus many
of these wanderers, though still plainly related by inheritance to
their brethren of the northern or southern hemispheres, now exist in
their new homes as well-marked varieties or as distinct species.

It is a remarkable fact, strongly insisted on by Hooker in regard to
America, and by Alph. de Candolle in regard to Australia, that many
more identical plants and allied forms have apparently migrated from
the north to the south, than in a reversed direction. We see, however,
a few southern vegetable forms on the mountains of Borneo and
Abyssinia. I suspect that this preponderant migration from north to
south is due to the greater extent of land in the north, and to the
northern forms having existed in their own homes in greater numbers,
and having consequently been advanced through natural selection and
competition to a higher stage of perfection or dominating power, than
the southern forms. And thus, when they became commingled during the
Glacial period, the northern forms were enabled to beat the less
powerful southern forms. Just in the same manner as we see at the
present day,
that very many European productions cover the ground in La Plata, and
in a lesser degree in Australia, and have to a certain extent beaten
the natives; whereas extremely few southern forms have become
naturalised in any part of Europe, though hides, wool, and other
objects likely to carry seeds have been largely imported into Europe
during the last two or three centuries from La Plata, and during the
last thirty or forty years from Australia. Something of the same kind
must have occurred on the intertropical mountains: no doubt before the
Glacial period they were stocked with endemic Alpine forms; but these
have almost everywhere largely yielded to the more dominant forms,
generated in the larger areas and more efficient workshops of the
north. In many islands the native productions are nearly equalled or
even outnumbered by the naturalised; and if the natives have not been
actually exterminated, their numbers have been greatly reduced, and
this is the first stage towards extinction. A mountain is an island on
the land; and the intertropical mountains before the Glacial period
must have been completely isolated; and I believe that the productions
of these islands on the land yielded to those produced within the
larger areas of the north, just in the same way as the productions of
real islands have everywhere lately yielded to continental forms,
naturalised by man’s agency.

I am far from supposing that all difficulties are removed on the view
here given in regard to the range and affinities of the allied species
which live in the northern and southern temperate zones and on the
mountains of the intertropical regions. Very many difficulties remain
to be solved. I do not pretend to indicate the exact lines and means of
migration, or the reason why certain species and not others have
migrated;
why certain species have been modified and have given rise to new
groups of forms, and others have remained unaltered. We cannot hope to
explain such facts, until we can say why one species and not another
becomes naturalised by man’s agency in a foreign land; why one ranges
twice or thrice as far, and is twice or thrice as common, as another
species within their own homes.

I have said that many difficulties remain to be solved: some of the
most remarkable are stated with admirable clearness by Dr. Hooker in
his botanical works on the antarctic regions. These cannot be here
discussed. I will only say that as far as regards the occurrence of
identical species at points so enormously remote as Kerguelen Land, New
Zealand, and Fuegia, I believe that towards the close of the Glacial
period, icebergs, as suggested by Lyell, have been largely concerned in
their dispersal. But the existence of several quite distinct species,
belonging to genera exclusively confined to the south, at these and
other distant points of the southern hemisphere, is, on my theory of
descent with modification, a far more remarkable case of difficulty.
For some of these species are so distinct, that we cannot suppose that
there has been time since the commencement of the Glacial period for
their migration, and for their subsequent modification to the necessary
degree. The facts seem to me to indicate that peculiar and very
distinct species have migrated in radiating lines from some common
centre; and I am inclined to look in the southern, as in the northern
hemisphere, to a former and warmer period, before the commencement of
the Glacial period, when the antarctic lands, now covered with ice,
supported a highly peculiar and isolated flora. I suspect that before
this flora was exterminated by the Glacial epoch, a few forms were
widely dispersed to various points of the southern hemisphere by
occasional means of transport, and by the aid, as halting-places, of
existing and now sunken islands, and perhaps at the commencement of the
Glacial period, by icebergs. By these means, as I believe, the southern
shores of America, Australia, New Zealand have become slightly tinted
by the same peculiar forms of vegetable life.

Sir C. Lyell in a striking passage has speculated, in language almost
identical with mine, on the effects of great alternations of climate on
geographical distribution. I believe that the world has recently felt
one of his great cycles of change; and that on this view, combined with
modification through natural selection, a multitude of facts in the
present distribution both of the same and of allied forms of life can
be explained. The living waters may be said to have flowed during one
short period from the north and from the south, and to have crossed at
the equator; but to have flowed with greater force from the north so as
to have freely inundated the south. As the tide leaves its drift in
horizontal lines, though rising higher on the shores where the tide
rises highest, so have the living waters left their living drift on our
mountain-summits, in a line gently rising from the arctic lowlands to a
great height under the equator. The various beings thus left stranded
may be compared with savage races of man, driven up and surviving in
the mountain-fastnesses of almost every land, which serve as a record,
full of interest to us, of the former inhabitants of the surrounding
lowlands.




CHAPTER XII.
GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION—_continued_.


Distribution of fresh-water productions. On the inhabitants of oceanic
islands. Absence of Batrachians and of terrestrial Mammals. On the
relation of the inhabitants of islands to those of the nearest
mainland. On colonisation from the nearest source with subsequent
modification. Summary of the last and present chapters.


As lakes and river-systems are separated from each other by barriers of
land, it might have been thought that fresh-water productions would not
have ranged widely within the same country, and as the sea is
apparently a still more impassable barrier, that they never would have
extended to distant countries. But the case is exactly the reverse. Not
only have many fresh-water species, belonging to quite different
classes, an enormous range, but allied species prevail in a remarkable
manner throughout the world. I well remember, when first collecting in
the fresh waters of Brazil, feeling much surprise at the similarity of
the fresh-water insects, shells, etc., and at the dissimilarity of the
surrounding terrestrial beings, compared with those of Britain.

But this power in fresh-water productions of ranging widely, though so
unexpected, can, I think, in most cases be explained by their having
become fitted, in a manner highly useful to them, for short and
frequent migrations from pond to pond, or from stream to stream; and
liability to wide dispersal would follow from this capacity as an
almost necessary consequence. We can here consider only a few cases. In
regard to
fish, I believe that the same species never occur in the fresh waters
of distant continents. But on the same continent the species often
range widely and almost capriciously; for two river-systems will have
some fish in common and some different. A few facts seem to favour the
possibility of their occasional transport by accidental means; like
that of the live fish not rarely dropped by whirlwinds in India, and
the vitality of their ova when removed from the water. But I am
inclined to attribute the dispersal of fresh-water fish mainly to
slight changes within the recent period in the level of the land,
having caused rivers to flow into each other. Instances, also, could be
given of this having occurred during floods, without any change of
level. We have evidence in the loess of the Rhine of considerable
changes of level in the land within a very recent geological period,
and when the surface was peopled by existing land and fresh-water
shells. The wide difference of the fish on opposite sides of continuous
mountain-ranges, which from an early period must have parted
river-systems and completely prevented their inosculation, seems to
lead to this same conclusion. With respect to allied fresh-water fish
occurring at very distant points of the world, no doubt there are many
cases which cannot at present be explained: but some fresh-water fish
belong to very ancient forms, and in such cases there will have been
ample time for great geographical changes, and consequently time and
means for much migration. In the second place, salt-water fish can with
care be slowly accustomed to live in fresh water; and, according to
Valenciennes, there is hardly a single group of fishes confined
exclusively to fresh water, so that we may imagine that a marine member
of a fresh-water group might travel far along the shores of the sea,
and subsequently
become modified and adapted to the fresh waters of a distant land.

Some species of fresh-water shells have a very wide range, and allied
species, which, on my theory, are descended from a common parent and
must have proceeded from a single source, prevail throughout the world.
Their distribution at first perplexed me much, as their ova are not
likely to be transported by birds, and they are immediately killed by
sea water, as are the adults. I could not even understand how some
naturalised species have rapidly spread throughout the same country.
But two facts, which I have observed—and no doubt many others remain to
be observed—throw some light on this subject. When a duck suddenly
emerges from a pond covered with duck-weed, I have twice seen these
little plants adhering to its back; and it has happened to me, in
removing a little duck-weed from one aquarium to another, that I have
quite unintentionally stocked the one with fresh-water shells from the
other. But another agency is perhaps more effectual: I suspended a
duck’s feet, which might represent those of a bird sleeping in a
natural pond, in an aquarium, where many ova of fresh-water shells were
hatching; and I found that numbers of the extremely minute and just
hatched shells crawled on the feet, and clung to them so firmly that
when taken out of the water they could not be jarred off, though at a
somewhat more advanced age they would voluntarily drop off. These just
hatched molluscs, though aquatic in their nature, survived on the
duck’s feet, in damp air, from twelve to twenty hours; and in this
length of time a duck or heron might fly at least six or seven hundred
miles, and would be sure to alight on a pool or rivulet, if blown
across sea to an oceanic island or to any other distant point. Sir
Charles Lyell also
informs me that a Dyticus has been caught with an Ancylus (a
fresh-water shell like a limpet) firmly adhering to it; and a
water-beetle of the same family, a Colymbetes, once flew on board the
‘Beagle,’ when forty-five miles distant from the nearest land: how much
farther it might have flown with a favouring gale no one can tell.

With respect to plants, it has long been known what enormous ranges
many fresh-water and even marsh-species have, both over continents and
to the most remote oceanic islands. This is strikingly shown, as
remarked by Alph. de Candolle, in large groups of terrestrial plants,
which have only a very few aquatic members; for these latter seem
immediately to acquire, as if in consequence, a very wide range. I
think favourable means of dispersal explain this fact. I have before
mentioned that earth occasionally, though rarely, adheres in some
quantity to the feet and beaks of birds. Wading birds, which frequent
the muddy edges of ponds, if suddenly flushed, would be the most likely
to have muddy feet. Birds of this order I can show are the greatest
wanderers, and are occasionally found on the most remote and barren
islands in the open ocean; they would not be likely to alight on the
surface of the sea, so that the dirt would not be washed off their
feet; when making land, they would be sure to fly to their natural
fresh-water haunts. I do not believe that botanists are aware how
charged the mud of ponds is with seeds: I have tried several little
experiments, but will here give only the most striking case: I took in
February three table-spoonfuls of mud from three different points,
beneath water, on the edge of a little pond; this mud when dry weighed
only 6 3/4 ounces; I kept it covered up in my study for six months,
pulling up and counting each plant as it grew; the plants were
of many kinds, and were altogether 537 in number; and yet the viscid
mud was all contained in a breakfast cup! Considering these facts, I
think it would be an inexplicable circumstance if water-birds did not
transport the seeds of fresh-water plants to vast distances, and if
consequently the range of these plants was not very great. The same
agency may have come into play with the eggs of some of the smaller
fresh-water animals.

Other and unknown agencies probably have also played a part. I have
stated that fresh-water fish eat some kinds of seeds, though they
reject many other kinds after having swallowed them; even small fish
swallow seeds of moderate size, as of the yellow water-lily and
Potamogeton. Herons and other birds, century after century, have gone
on daily devouring fish; they then take flight and go to other waters,
or are blown across the sea; and we have seen that seeds retain their
power of germination, when rejected in pellets or in excrement, many
hours afterwards. When I saw the great size of the seeds of that fine
water-lily, the Nelumbium, and remembered Alph. de Candolle’s remarks
on this plant, I thought that its distribution must remain quite
inexplicable; but Audubon states that he found the seeds of the great
southern water-lily (probably, according to Dr. Hooker, the Nelumbium
luteum) in a heron’s stomach; although I do not know the fact, yet
analogy makes me believe that a heron flying to another pond and
getting a hearty meal of fish, would probably reject from its stomach a
pellet containing the seeds of the Nelumbium undigested; or the seeds
might be dropped by the bird whilst feeding its young, in the same way
as fish are known sometimes to be dropped.

In considering these several means of distribution,
it should be remembered that when a pond or stream is first formed, for
instance, on a rising islet, it will be unoccupied; and a single seed
or egg will have a good chance of succeeding. Although there will
always be a struggle for life between the individuals of the species,
however few, already occupying any pond, yet as the number of kinds is
small, compared with those on the land, the competition will probably
be less severe between aquatic than between terrestrial species;
consequently an intruder from the waters of a foreign country, would
have a better chance of seizing on a place, than in the case of
terrestrial colonists. We should, also, remember that some, perhaps
many, fresh-water productions are low in the scale of nature, and that
we have reason to believe that such low beings change or become
modified less quickly than the high; and this will give longer time
than the average for the migration of the same aquatic species. We
should not forget the probability of many species having formerly
ranged as continuously as fresh-water productions ever can range, over
immense areas, and having subsequently become extinct in intermediate
regions. But the wide distribution of fresh-water plants and of the
lower animals, whether retaining the same identical form or in some
degree modified, I believe mainly depends on the wide dispersal of
their seeds and eggs by animals, more especially by fresh-water birds,
which have large powers of flight, and naturally travel from one to
another and often distant piece of water. Nature, like a careful
gardener, thus takes her seeds from a bed of a particular nature, and
drops them in another equally well fitted for them.

_On the Inhabitants of Oceanic Islands_.—We now come to the last of the
three classes of facts, which I
have selected as presenting the greatest amount of difficulty, on the
view that all the individuals both of the same and of allied species
have descended from a single parent; and therefore have all proceeded
from a common birthplace, notwithstanding that in the course of time
they have come to inhabit distant points of the globe. I have already
stated that I cannot honestly admit Forbes’s view on continental
extensions, which, if legitimately followed out, would lead to the
belief that within the recent period all existing islands have been
nearly or quite joined to some continent. This view would remove many
difficulties, but it would not, I think, explain all the facts in
regard to insular productions. In the following remarks I shall not
confine myself to the mere question of dispersal; but shall consider
some other facts, which bear on the truth of the two theories of
independent creation and of descent with modification.

The species of all kinds which inhabit oceanic islands are few in
number compared with those on equal continental areas: Alph. de
Candolle admits this for plants, and Wollaston for insects. If we look
to the large size and varied stations of New Zealand, extending over
780 miles of latitude, and compare its flowering plants, only 750 in
number, with those on an equal area at the Cape of Good Hope or in
Australia, we must, I think, admit that something quite independently
of any difference in physical conditions has caused so great a
difference in number. Even the uniform county of Cambridge has 847
plants, and the little island of Anglesea 764, but a few ferns and a
few introduced plants are included in these numbers, and the comparison
in some other respects is not quite fair. We have evidence that the
barren island of Ascension aboriginally possessed under half-a-dozen
flowering
plants; yet many have become naturalised on it, as they have on New
Zealand and on every other oceanic island which can be named. In St.
Helena there is reason to believe that the naturalised plants and
animals have nearly or quite exterminated many native productions. He
who admits the doctrine of the creation of each separate species, will
have to admit, that a sufficient number of the best adapted plants and
animals have not been created on oceanic islands; for man has
unintentionally stocked them from various sources far more fully and
perfectly than has nature.

Although in oceanic islands the number of kinds of inhabitants is
scanty, the proportion of endemic species (_i.e._ those found nowhere
else in the world) is often extremely large. If we compare, for
instance, the number of the endemic land-shells in Madeira, or of the
endemic birds in the Galapagos Archipelago, with the number found on
any continent, and then compare the area of the islands with that of
the continent, we shall see that this is true. This fact might have
been expected on my theory, for, as already explained, species
occasionally arriving after long intervals in a new and isolated
district, and having to compete with new associates, will be eminently
liable to modification, and will often produce groups of modified
descendants. But it by no means follows, that, because in an island
nearly all the species of one class are peculiar, those of another
class, or of another section of the same class, are peculiar; and this
difference seems to depend on the species which do not become modified
having immigrated with facility and in a body, so that their mutual
relations have not been much disturbed. Thus in the Galapagos Islands
nearly every land-bird, but only two out of the eleven marine birds,
are peculiar; and it is obvious that
marine birds could arrive at these islands more easily than land-birds.
Bermuda, on the other hand, which lies at about the same distance from
North America as the Galapagos Islands do from South America, and which
has a very peculiar soil, does not possess one endemic land bird; and
we know from Mr. J. M. Jones’s admirable account of Bermuda, that very
many North American birds, during their great annual migrations, visit
either periodically or occasionally this island. Madeira does not
possess one peculiar bird, and many European and African birds are
almost every year blown there, as I am informed by Mr. E. V. Harcourt.
So that these two islands of Bermuda and Madeira have been stocked by
birds, which for long ages have struggled together in their former
homes, and have become mutually adapted to each other; and when settled
in their new homes, each kind will have been kept by the others to
their proper places and habits, and will consequently have been little
liable to modification. Madeira, again, is inhabited by a wonderful
number of peculiar land-shells, whereas not one species of sea-shell is
confined to its shores: now, though we do not know how seashells are
dispersed, yet we can see that their eggs or larvæ, perhaps attached to
seaweed or floating timber, or to the feet of wading-birds, might be
transported far more easily than land-shells, across three or four
hundred miles of open sea. The different orders of insects in Madeira
apparently present analogous facts.

Oceanic islands are sometimes deficient in certain classes, and their
places are apparently occupied by the other inhabitants; in the
Galapagos Islands reptiles, and in New Zealand gigantic wingless birds,
take the place of mammals. In the plants of the Galapagos Islands, Dr.
Hooker has shown that the proportional numbers of the different orders
are very different from
what they are elsewhere. Such cases are generally accounted for by the
physical conditions of the islands; but this explanation seems to me
not a little doubtful. Facility of immigration, I believe, has been at
least as important as the nature of the conditions.

Many remarkable little facts could be given with respect to the
inhabitants of remote islands. For instance, in certain islands not
tenanted by mammals, some of the endemic plants have beautifully hooked
seeds; yet few relations are more striking than the adaptation of
hooked seeds for transportal by the wool and fur of quadrupeds. This
case presents no difficulty on my view, for a hooked seed might be
transported to an island by some other means; and the plant then
becoming slightly modified, but still retaining its hooked seeds, would
form an endemic species, having as useless an appendage as any
rudimentary organ,—for instance, as the shrivelled wings under the
soldered elytra of many insular beetles. Again, islands often possess
trees or bushes belonging to orders which elsewhere include only
herbaceous species; now trees, as Alph. de Candolle has shown,
generally have, whatever the cause may be, confined ranges. Hence trees
would be little likely to reach distant oceanic islands; and an
herbaceous plant, though it would have no chance of successfully
competing in stature with a fully developed tree, when established on
an island and having to compete with herbaceous plants alone, might
readily gain an advantage by growing taller and taller and overtopping
the other plants. If so, natural selection would often tend to add to
the stature of herbaceous plants when growing on an island, to whatever
order they belonged, and thus convert them first into bushes and
ultimately into trees.

With respect to the absence of whole orders on
oceanic islands, Bory St. Vincent long ago remarked that Batrachians
(frogs, toads, newts) have never been found on any of the many islands
with which the great oceans are studded. I have taken pains to verify
this assertion, and I have found it strictly true. I have, however,
been assured that a frog exists on the mountains of the great island of
New Zealand; but I suspect that this exception (if the information be
correct) may be explained through glacial agency. This general absence
of frogs, toads, and newts on so many oceanic islands cannot be
accounted for by their physical conditions; indeed it seems that
islands are peculiarly well fitted for these animals; for frogs have
been introduced into Madeira, the Azores, and Mauritius, and have
multiplied so as to become a nuisance. But as these animals and their
spawn are known to be immediately killed by sea-water, on my view we
can see that there would be great difficulty in their transportal
across the sea, and therefore why they do not exist on any oceanic
island. But why, on the theory of creation, they should not have been
created there, it would be very difficult to explain.

Mammals offer another and similar case. I have carefully searched the
oldest voyages, but have not finished my search; as yet I have not
found a single instance, free from doubt, of a terrestrial mammal
(excluding domesticated animals kept by the natives) inhabiting an
island situated above 300 miles from a continent or great continental
island; and many islands situated at a much less distance are equally
barren. The Falkland Islands, which are inhabited by a wolf-like fox,
come nearest to an exception; but this group cannot be considered as
oceanic, as it lies on a bank connected with the mainland; moreover,
icebergs formerly brought boulders to its western shores, and they may
have formerly transported foxes, as so frequently now happens in the
arctic regions. Yet it cannot be said that small islands will not
support small mammals, for they occur in many parts of the world on
very small islands, if close to a continent; and hardly an island can
be named on which our smaller quadrupeds have not become naturalised
and greatly multiplied. It cannot be said, on the ordinary view of
creation, that there has not been time for the creation of mammals;
many volcanic islands are sufficiently ancient, as shown by the
stupendous degradation which they have suffered and by their tertiary
strata: there has also been time for the production of endemic species
belonging to other classes; and on continents it is thought that
mammals appear and disappear at a quicker rate than other and lower
animals. Though terrestrial mammals do not occur on oceanic islands,
ærial mammals do occur on almost every island. New Zealand possesses
two bats found nowhere else in the world: Norfolk Island, the Viti
Archipelago, the Bonin Islands, the Caroline and Marianne
Archipelagoes, and Mauritius, all possess their peculiar bats. Why, it
may be asked, has the supposed creative force produced bats and no
other mammals on remote islands? On my view this question can easily be
answered; for no terrestrial mammal can be transported across a wide
space of sea, but bats can fly across. Bats have been seen wandering by
day far over the Atlantic Ocean; and two North American species either
regularly or occasionally visit Bermuda, at the distance of 600 miles
from the mainland. I hear from Mr. Tomes, who has specially studied
this family, that many of the same species have enormous ranges, and
are found on continents and on far distant islands. Hence we have only
to suppose that such wandering species have been modified
through natural selection in their new homes in relation to their new
position, and we can understand the presence of endemic bats on
islands, with the absence of all terrestrial mammals.

Besides the absence of terrestrial mammals in relation to the
remoteness of islands from continents, there is also a relation, to a
certain extent independent of distance, between the depth of the sea
separating an island from the neighbouring mainland, and the presence
in both of the same mammiferous species or of allied species in a more
or less modified condition. Mr. Windsor Earl has made some striking
observations on this head in regard to the great Malay Archipelago,
which is traversed near Celebes by a space of deep ocean; and this
space separates two widely distinct mammalian faunas. On either side
the islands are situated on moderately deep submarine banks, and they
are inhabited by closely allied or identical quadrupeds. No doubt some
few anomalies occur in this great archipelago, and there is much
difficulty in forming a judgment in some cases owing to the probable
naturalisation of certain mammals through man’s agency; but we shall
soon have much light thrown on the natural history of this archipelago
by the admirable zeal and researches of Mr. Wallace. I have not as yet
had time to follow up this subject in all other quarters of the world;
but as far as I have gone, the relation generally holds good. We see
Britain separated by a shallow channel from Europe, and the mammals are
the same on both sides; we meet with analogous facts on many islands
separated by similar channels from Australia. The West Indian Islands
stand on a deeply submerged bank, nearly 1000 fathoms in depth, and
here we find American forms, but the species and even the genera are
distinct. As the amount of modification in all cases depends to
a certain degree on the lapse of time, and as during changes of level
it is obvious that islands separated by shallow channels are more
likely to have been continuously united within a recent period to the
mainland than islands separated by deeper channels, we can understand
the frequent relation between the depth of the sea and the degree of
affinity of the mammalian inhabitants of islands with those of a
neighbouring continent,—an inexplicable relation on the view of
independent acts of creation.

All the foregoing remarks on the inhabitants of oceanic
islands,—namely, the scarcity of kinds—the richness in endemic forms in
particular classes or sections of classes,—the absence of whole groups,
as of batrachians, and of terrestrial mammals notwithstanding the
presence of ærial bats,—the singular proportions of certain orders of
plants,—herbaceous forms having been developed into trees, etc.,—seem
to me to accord better with the view of occasional means of transport
having been largely efficient in the long course of time, than with the
view of all our oceanic islands having been formerly connected by
continuous land with the nearest continent; for on this latter view the
migration would probably have been more complete; and if modification
be admitted, all the forms of life would have been more equally
modified, in accordance with the paramount importance of the relation
of organism to organism.

I do not deny that there are many and grave difficulties in
understanding how several of the inhabitants of the more remote
islands, whether still retaining the same specific form or modified
since their arrival, could have reached their present homes. But the
probability of many islands having existed as halting-places, of which
not a wreck now remains, must not be overlooked.
I will here give a single instance of one of the cases of difficulty.
Almost all oceanic islands, even the most isolated and smallest, are
inhabited by land-shells, generally by endemic species, but sometimes
by species found elsewhere. Dr. Aug. A. Gould has given several
interesting cases in regard to the land-shells of the islands of the
Pacific. Now it is notorious that land-shells are very easily killed by
salt; their eggs, at least such as I have tried, sink in sea-water and
are killed by it. Yet there must be, on my view, some unknown, but
highly efficient means for their transportal. Would the just-hatched
young occasionally crawl on and adhere to the feet of birds roosting on
the ground, and thus get transported? It occurred to me that
land-shells, when hybernating and having a membranous diaphragm over
the mouth of the shell, might be floated in chinks of drifted timber
across moderately wide arms of the sea. And I found that several
species did in this state withstand uninjured an immersion in sea-water
during seven days: one of these shells was the Helix pomatia, and after
it had again hybernated I put it in sea-water for twenty days, and it
perfectly recovered. As this species has a thick calcareous operculum,
I removed it, and when it had formed a new membranous one, I immersed
it for fourteen days in sea-water, and it recovered and crawled away:
but more experiments are wanted on this head.

The most striking and important fact for us in regard to the
inhabitants of islands, is their affinity to those of the nearest
mainland, without being actually the same species. Numerous instances
could be given of this fact. I will give only one, that of the
Galapagos Archipelago, situated under the equator, between 500 and 600
miles from the shores of South America. Here
almost every product of the land and water bears the unmistakeable
stamp of the American continent. There are twenty-six land birds, and
twenty-five of these are ranked by Mr. Gould as distinct species,
supposed to have been created here; yet the close affinity of most of
these birds to American species in every character, in their habits,
gestures, and tones of voice, was manifest. So it is with the other
animals, and with nearly all the plants, as shown by Dr. Hooker in his
admirable memoir on the Flora of this archipelago. The naturalist,
looking at the inhabitants of these volcanic islands in the Pacific,
distant several hundred miles from the continent, yet feels that he is
standing on American land. Why should this be so? why should the
species which are supposed to have been created in the Galapagos
Archipelago, and nowhere else, bear so plain a stamp of affinity to
those created in America? There is nothing in the conditions of life,
in the geological nature of the islands, in their height or climate, or
in the proportions in which the several classes are associated
together, which resembles closely the conditions of the South American
coast: in fact there is a considerable dissimilarity in all these
respects. On the other hand, there is a considerable degree of
resemblance in the volcanic nature of the soil, in climate, height, and
size of the islands, between the Galapagos and Cape de Verde
Archipelagos: but what an entire and absolute difference in their
inhabitants! The inhabitants of the Cape de Verde Islands are related
to those of Africa, like those of the Galapagos to America. I believe
this grand fact can receive no sort of explanation on the ordinary view
of independent creation; whereas on the view here maintained, it is
obvious that the Galapagos Islands would be likely to receive
colonists, whether by occasional means of transport or
by formerly continuous land, from America; and the Cape de Verde
Islands from Africa; and that such colonists would be liable to
modification;—the principle of inheritance still betraying their
original birthplace.

Many analogous facts could be given: indeed it is an almost universal
rule that the endemic productions of islands are related to those of
the nearest continent, or of other near islands. The exceptions are
few, and most of them can be explained. Thus the plants of Kerguelen
Land, though standing nearer to Africa than to America, are related,
and that very closely, as we know from Dr. Hooker’s account, to those
of America: but on the view that this island has been mainly stocked by
seeds brought with earth and stones on icebergs, drifted by the
prevailing currents, this anomaly disappears. New Zealand in its
endemic plants is much more closely related to Australia, the nearest
mainland, than to any other region: and this is what might have been
expected; but it is also plainly related to South America, which,
although the next nearest continent, is so enormously remote, that the
fact becomes an anomaly. But this difficulty almost disappears on the
view that both New Zealand, South America, and other southern lands
were long ago partially stocked from a nearly intermediate though
distant point, namely from the antarctic islands, when they were
clothed with vegetation, before the commencement of the Glacial period.
The affinity, which, though feeble, I am assured by Dr. Hooker is real,
between the flora of the south-western corner of Australia and of the
Cape of Good Hope, is a far more remarkable case, and is at present
inexplicable: but this affinity is confined to the plants, and will, I
do not doubt, be some day explained.

The law which causes the inhabitants of an archipelago,
though specifically distinct, to be closely allied to those of the
nearest continent, we sometimes see displayed on a small scale, yet in
a most interesting manner, within the limits of the same archipelago.
Thus the several islands of the Galapagos Archipelago are tenanted, as
I have elsewhere shown, in a quite marvellous manner, by very closely
related species; so that the inhabitants of each separate island,
though mostly distinct, are related in an incomparably closer degree to
each other than to the inhabitants of any other part of the world. And
this is just what might have been expected on my view, for the islands
are situated so near each other that they would almost certainly
receive immigrants from the same original source, or from each other.
But this dissimilarity between the endemic inhabitants of the islands
may be used as an argument against my views; for it may be asked, how
has it happened in the several islands situated within sight of each
other, having the same geological nature, the same height, climate,
etc., that many of the immigrants should have been differently
modified, though only in a small degree. This long appeared to me a
great difficulty: but it arises in chief part from the deeply-seated
error of considering the physical conditions of a country as the most
important for its inhabitants; whereas it cannot, I think, be disputed
that the nature of the other inhabitants, with which each has to
compete, is at least as important, and generally a far more important
element of success. Now if we look to those inhabitants of the
Galapagos Archipelago which are found in other parts of the world
(laying on one side for the moment the endemic species, which cannot be
here fairly included, as we are considering how they have come to be
modified since their arrival), we find a considerable amount
of difference in the several islands. This difference might indeed have
been expected on the view of the islands having been stocked by
occasional means of transport—a seed, for instance, of one plant having
been brought to one island, and that of another plant to another
island. Hence when in former times an immigrant settled on any one or
more of the islands, or when it subsequently spread from one island to
another, it would undoubtedly be exposed to different conditions of
life in the different islands, for it would have to compete with
different sets of organisms: a plant, for instance, would find the
best-fitted ground more perfectly occupied by distinct plants in one
island than in another, and it would be exposed to the attacks of
somewhat different enemies. If then it varied, natural selection would
probably favour different varieties in the different islands. Some
species, however, might spread and yet retain the same character
throughout the group, just as we see on continents some species
spreading widely and remaining the same.

The really surprising fact in this case of the Galapagos Archipelago,
and in a lesser degree in some analogous instances, is that the new
species formed in the separate islands have not quickly spread to the
other islands. But the islands, though in sight of each other, are
separated by deep arms of the sea, in most cases wider than the British
Channel, and there is no reason to suppose that they have at any former
period been continuously united. The currents of the sea are rapid and
sweep across the archipelago, and gales of wind are extraordinarily
rare; so that the islands are far more effectually separated from each
other than they appear to be on a map. Nevertheless a good many
species, both those found in other parts of the world and those
confined to the archipelago, are common to
the several islands, and we may infer from certain facts that these
have probably spread from some one island to the others. But we often
take, I think, an erroneous view of the probability of closely allied
species invading each other’s territory, when put into free
intercommunication. Undoubtedly if one species has any advantage
whatever over another, it will in a very brief time wholly or in part
supplant it; but if both are equally well fitted for their own places
in nature, both probably will hold their own places and keep separate
for almost any length of time. Being familiar with the fact that many
species, naturalised through man’s agency, have spread with astonishing
rapidity over new countries, we are apt to infer that most species
would thus spread; but we should remember that the forms which become
naturalised in new countries are not generally closely allied to the
aboriginal inhabitants, but are very distinct species, belonging in a
large proportion of cases, as shown by Alph. de Candolle, to distinct
genera. In the Galapagos Archipelago, many even of the birds, though so
well adapted for flying from island to island, are distinct on each;
thus there are three closely-allied species of mocking-thrush, each
confined to its own island. Now let us suppose the mocking-thrush of
Chatham Island to be blown to Charles Island, which has its own
mocking-thrush: why should it succeed in establishing itself there? We
may safely infer that Charles Island is well stocked with its own
species, for annually more eggs are laid there than can possibly be
reared; and we may infer that the mocking-thrush peculiar to Charles
Island is at least as well fitted for its home as is the species
peculiar to Chatham Island. Sir C. Lyell and Mr. Wollaston have
communicated to me a remarkable fact bearing on this subject; namely,
that Madeira and the adjoining islet of
Porto Santo possess many distinct but representative land-shells, some
of which live in crevices of stone; and although large quantities of
stone are annually transported from Porto Santo to Madeira, yet this
latter island has not become colonised by the Porto Santo species:
nevertheless both islands have been colonised by some European
land-shells, which no doubt had some advantage over the indigenous
species. From these considerations I think we need not greatly marvel
at the endemic and representative species, which inhabit the several
islands of the Galapagos Archipelago, not having universally spread
from island to island. In many other instances, as in the several
districts of the same continent, pre-occupation has probably played an
important part in checking the commingling of species under the same
conditions of life. Thus, the south-east and south-west corners of
Australia have nearly the same physical conditions, and are united by
continuous land, yet they are inhabited by a vast number of distinct
mammals, birds, and plants.

The principle which determines the general character of the fauna and
flora of oceanic islands, namely, that the inhabitants, when not
identically the same, yet are plainly related to the inhabitants of
that region whence colonists could most readily have been derived,—the
colonists having been subsequently modified and better fitted to their
new homes,—is of the widest application throughout nature. We see this
on every mountain, in every lake and marsh. For Alpine species,
excepting in so far as the same forms, chiefly of plants, have spread
widely throughout the world during the recent Glacial epoch, are
related to those of the surrounding lowlands;—thus we have in South
America, Alpine humming-birds, Alpine rodents, Alpine plants, etc., all
of strictly American forms, and it is obvious
that a mountain, as it became slowly upheaved, would naturally be
colonised from the surrounding lowlands. So it is with the inhabitants
of lakes and marshes, excepting in so far as great facility of
transport has given the same general forms to the whole world. We see
this same principle in the blind animals inhabiting the caves of
America and of Europe. Other analogous facts could be given. And it
will, I believe, be universally found to be true, that wherever in two
regions, let them be ever so distant, many closely allied or
representative species occur, there will likewise be found some
identical species, showing, in accordance with the foregoing view, that
at some former period there has been intercommunication or migration
between the two regions. And wherever many closely-allied species
occur, there will be found many forms which some naturalists rank as
distinct species, and some as varieties; these doubtful forms showing
us the steps in the process of modification.

This relation between the power and extent of migration of a species,
either at the present time or at some former period under different
physical conditions, and the existence at remote points of the world of
other species allied to it, is shown in another and more general way.
Mr. Gould remarked to me long ago, that in those genera of birds which
range over the world, many of the species have very wide ranges. I can
hardly doubt that this rule is generally true, though it would be
difficult to prove it. Amongst mammals, we see it strikingly displayed
in Bats, and in a lesser degree in the Felidæ and Canidæ. We see it, if
we compare the distribution of butterflies and beetles. So it is with
most fresh-water productions, in which so many genera range over the
world, and many individual species have enormous ranges. It is not
meant that in world-ranging
genera all the species have a wide range, or even that they have on an
_average_ a wide range; but only that some of the species range very
widely; for the facility with which widely-ranging species vary and
give rise to new forms will largely determine their average range. For
instance, two varieties of the same species inhabit America and Europe,
and the species thus has an immense range; but, if the variation had
been a little greater, the two varieties would have been ranked as
distinct species, and the common range would have been greatly reduced.
Still less is it meant, that a species which apparently has the
capacity of crossing barriers and ranging widely, as in the case of
certain powerfully-winged birds, will necessarily range widely; for we
should never forget that to range widely implies not only the power of
crossing barriers, but the more important power of being victorious in
distant lands in the struggle for life with foreign associates. But on
the view of all the species of a genus having descended from a single
parent, though now distributed to the most remote points of the world,
we ought to find, and I believe as a general rule we do find, that some
at least of the species range very widely; for it is necessary that the
unmodified parent should range widely, undergoing modification during
its diffusion, and should place itself under diverse conditions
favourable for the conversion of its offspring, firstly into new
varieties and ultimately into new species.

In considering the wide distribution of certain genera, we should bear
in mind that some are extremely ancient, and must have branched off
from a common parent at a remote epoch; so that in such cases there
will have been ample time for great climatal and geographical changes
and for accidents of transport; and consequently for the migration of
some of the species into all
quarters of the world, where they may have become slightly modified in
relation to their new conditions. There is, also, some reason to
believe from geological evidence that organisms low in the scale within
each great class, generally change at a slower rate than the higher
forms; and consequently the lower forms will have had a better chance
of ranging widely and of still retaining the same specific character.
This fact, together with the seeds and eggs of many low forms being
very minute and better fitted for distant transportation, probably
accounts for a law which has long been observed, and which has lately
been admirably discussed by Alph. de Candolle in regard to plants,
namely, that the lower any group of organisms is, the more widely it is
apt to range.

The relations just discussed,—namely, low and slowly-changing organisms
ranging more widely than the high,—some of the species of
widely-ranging genera themselves ranging widely,—such facts, as alpine,
lacustrine, and marsh productions being related (with the exceptions
before specified) to those on the surrounding low lands and dry lands,
though these stations are so different—the very close relation of the
distinct species which inhabit the islets of the same archipelago,—and
especially the striking relation of the inhabitants of each whole
archipelago or island to those of the nearest mainland,—are, I think,
utterly inexplicable on the ordinary view of the independent creation
of each species, but are explicable on the view of colonisation from
the nearest and readiest source, together with the subsequent
modification and better adaptation of the colonists to their new homes.

_Summary of last and present Chapters_.—In these chapters I have
endeavoured to show, that if we make due allowance for our ignorance of
the full effects of all
the changes of climate and of the level of the land, which have
certainly occurred within the recent period, and of other similar
changes which may have occurred within the same period; if we remember
how profoundly ignorant we are with respect to the many and curious
means of occasional transport,—a subject which has hardly ever been
properly experimentised on; if we bear in mind how often a species may
have ranged continuously over a wide area, and then have become extinct
in the intermediate tracts, I think the difficulties in believing that
all the individuals of the same species, wherever located, have
descended from the same parents, are not insuperable. And we are led to
this conclusion, which has been arrived at by many naturalists under
the designation of single centres of creation, by some general
considerations, more especially from the importance of barriers and
from the analogical distribution of sub-genera, genera, and families.

With respect to the distinct species of the same genus, which on my
theory must have spread from one parent-source; if we make the same
allowances as before for our ignorance, and remember that some forms of
life change most slowly, enormous periods of time being thus granted
for their migration, I do not think that the difficulties are
insuperable; though they often are in this case, and in that of the
individuals of the same species, extremely grave.

As exemplifying the effects of climatal changes on distribution, I have
attempted to show how important has been the influence of the modern
Glacial period, which I am fully convinced simultaneously affected the
whole world, or at least great meridional belts. As showing how
diversified are the means of occasional transport, I have discussed at
some little length the means of dispersal of fresh-water productions.


If the difficulties be not insuperable in admitting that in the long
course of time the individuals of the same species, and likewise of
allied species, have proceeded from some one source; then I think all
the grand leading facts of geographical distribution are explicable on
the theory of migration (generally of the more dominant forms of life),
together with subsequent modification and the multiplication of new
forms. We can thus understand the high importance of barriers, whether
of land or water, which separate our several zoological and botanical
provinces. We can thus understand the localisation of sub-genera,
genera, and families; and how it is that under different latitudes, for
instance in South America, the inhabitants of the plains and mountains,
of the forests, marshes, and deserts, are in so mysterious a manner
linked together by affinity, and are likewise linked to the extinct
beings which formerly inhabited the same continent. Bearing in mind
that the mutual relations of organism to organism are of the highest
importance, we can see why two areas having nearly the same physical
conditions should often be inhabited by very different forms of life;
for according to the length of time which has elapsed since new
inhabitants entered one region; according to the nature of the
communication which allowed certain forms and not others to enter,
either in greater or lesser numbers; according or not, as those which
entered happened to come in more or less direct competition with each
other and with the aborigines; and according as the immigrants were
capable of varying more or less rapidly, there would ensue in different
regions, independently of their physical conditions, infinitely
diversified conditions of life,—there would be an almost endless amount
of organic action and reaction,—and we should find, as we do find, some
groups of beings greatly, and some only slightly modified,—some
developed
in great force, some existing in scanty numbers—in the different great
geographical provinces of the world.

On these same principles, we can understand, as I have endeavoured to
show, why oceanic islands should have few inhabitants, but of these a
great number should be endemic or peculiar; and why, in relation to the
means of migration, one group of beings, even within the same class,
should have all its species endemic, and another group should have all
its species common to other quarters of the world. We can see why whole
groups of organisms, as batrachians and terrestrial mammals, should be
absent from oceanic islands, whilst the most isolated islands possess
their own peculiar species of ærial mammals or bats. We can see why
there should be some relation between the presence of mammals, in a
more or less modified condition, and the depth of the sea between an
island and the mainland. We can clearly see why all the inhabitants of
an archipelago, though specifically distinct on the several islets,
should be closely related to each other, and likewise be related, but
less closely, to those of the nearest continent or other source whence
immigrants were probably derived. We can see why in two areas, however
distant from each other, there should be a correlation, in the presence
of identical species, of varieties, of doubtful species, and of
distinct but representative species.

As the late Edward Forbes often insisted, there is a striking
parallelism in the laws of life throughout time and space: the laws
governing the succession of forms in past times being nearly the same
with those governing at the present time the differences in different
areas. We see this in many facts. The endurance of each species and
group of species is continuous in time; for the exceptions to the rule
are so few, that they may
fairly be attributed to our not having as yet discovered in an
intermediate deposit the forms which are therein absent, but which
occur above and below: so in space, it certainly is the general rule
that the area inhabited by a single species, or by a group of species,
is continuous; and the exceptions, which are not rare, may, as I have
attempted to show, be accounted for by migration at some former period
under different conditions or by occasional means of transport, and by
the species having become extinct in the intermediate tracts. Both in
time and space, species and groups of species have their points of
maximum development. Groups of species, belonging either to a certain
period of time, or to a certain area, are often characterised by
trifling characters in common, as of sculpture or colour. In looking to
the long succession of ages, as in now looking to distant provinces
throughout the world, we find that some organisms differ little, whilst
others belonging to a different class, or to a different order, or even
only to a different family of the same order, differ greatly. In both
time and space the lower members of each class generally change less
than the higher; but there are in both cases marked exceptions to the
rule. On my theory these several relations throughout time and space
are intelligible; for whether we look to the forms of life which have
changed during successive ages within the same quarter of the world, or
to those which have changed after having migrated into distant
quarters, in both cases the forms within each class have been connected
by the same bond of ordinary generation; and the more nearly any two
forms are related in blood, the nearer they will generally stand to
each other in time and space; in both cases the laws of variation have
been the same, and modifications have been accumulated by the same
power of natural selection.




CHAPTER XIII.
MUTUAL AFFINITIES OF ORGANIC BEINGS: MORPHOLOGY: EMBRYOLOGY:
RUDIMENTARY ORGANS.


CLASSIFICATION, groups subordinate to groups. Natural system. Rules and
difficulties in classification, explained on the theory of descent with
modification. Classification of varieties. Descent always used in
classification. Analogical or adaptive characters. Affinities, general,
complex and radiating. Extinction separates and defines groups.
MORPHOLOGY, between members of the same class, between parts of the
same individual. EMBRYOLOGY, laws of, explained by variations not
supervening at an early age, and being inherited at a corresponding
age. RUDIMENTARY ORGANS; their origin explained. Summary.


From the first dawn of life, all organic beings are found to resemble
each other in descending degrees, so that they can be classed in groups
under groups. This classification is evidently not arbitrary like the
grouping of the stars in constellations. The existence of groups would
have been of simple signification, if one group had been exclusively
fitted to inhabit the land, and another the water; one to feed on
flesh, another on vegetable matter, and so on; but the case is widely
different in nature; for it is notorious how commonly members of even
the same subgroup have different habits. In our second and fourth
chapters, on Variation and on Natural Selection, I have attempted to
show that it is the widely ranging, the much diffused and common, that
is the dominant species belonging to the larger genera, which vary
most. The varieties, or incipient species, thus produced ultimately
become converted, as I believe, into new and distinct species; and
these, on the principle of inheritance, tend to produce other new and
dominant
species. Consequently the groups which are now large, and which
generally include many dominant species, tend to go on increasing
indefinitely in size. I further attempted to show that from the varying
descendants of each species trying to occupy as many and as different
places as possible in the economy of nature, there is a constant
tendency in their characters to diverge. This conclusion was supported
by looking at the great diversity of the forms of life which, in any
small area, come into the closest competition, and by looking to
certain facts in naturalisation.

I attempted also to show that there is a constant tendency in the forms
which are increasing in number and diverging in character, to supplant
and exterminate the less divergent, the less improved, and preceding
forms. I request the reader to turn to the diagram illustrating the
action, as formerly explained, of these several principles; and he will
see that the inevitable result is that the modified descendants
proceeding from one progenitor become broken up into groups subordinate
to groups. In the diagram each letter on the uppermost line may
represent a genus including several species; and all the genera on this
line form together one class, for all have descended from one ancient
but unseen parent, and, consequently, have inherited something in
common. But the three genera on the left hand have, on this same
principle, much in common, and form a sub-family, distinct from that
including the next two genera on the right hand, which diverged from a
common parent at the fifth stage of descent. These five genera have
also much, though less, in common; and they form a family distinct from
that including the three genera still further to the right hand, which
diverged at a still earlier period. And all these genera, descended
from (A), form an order distinct from the
genera descended from (I). So that we here have many species descended
from a single progenitor grouped into genera; and the genera are
included in, or subordinate to, sub-families, families, and orders, all
united into one class. Thus, the grand fact in natural history of the
subordination of group under group, which, from its familiarity, does
not always sufficiently strike us, is in my judgment fully explained.

Naturalists try to arrange the species, genera, and families in each
class, on what is called the Natural System. But what is meant by this
system? Some authors look at it merely as a scheme for arranging
together those living objects which are most alike, and for separating
those which are most unlike; or as an artificial means for enunciating,
as briefly as possible, general propositions,—that is, by one sentence
to give the characters common, for instance, to all mammals, by another
those common to all carnivora, by another those common to the
dog-genus, and then by adding a single sentence, a full description is
given of each kind of dog. The ingenuity and utility of this system are
indisputable. But many naturalists think that something more is meant
by the Natural System; they believe that it reveals the plan of the
Creator; but unless it be specified whether order in time or space, or
what else is meant by the plan of the Creator, it seems to me that
nothing is thus added to our knowledge. Such expressions as that famous
one of Linnæus, and which we often meet with in a more or less
concealed form, that the characters do not make the genus, but that the
genus gives the characters, seem to imply that something more is
included in our classification, than mere resemblance. I believe that
something more is included; and that propinquity of descent,—the only
known cause of the similarity of organic beings,—is the bond, hidden as
it is by various degrees of modification,
which is partially revealed to us by our classifications.

Let us now consider the rules followed in classification, and the
difficulties which are encountered on the view that classification
either gives some unknown plan of creation, or is simply a scheme for
enunciating general propositions and of placing together the forms most
like each other. It might have been thought (and was in ancient times
thought) that those parts of the structure which determined the habits
of life, and the general place of each being in the economy of nature,
would be of very high importance in classification. Nothing can be more
false. No one regards the external similarity of a mouse to a shrew, of
a dugong to a whale, of a whale to a fish, as of any importance. These
resemblances, though so intimately connected with the whole life of the
being, are ranked as merely “adaptive or analogical characters;” but to
the consideration of these resemblances we shall have to recur. It may
even be given as a general rule, that the less any part of the
organisation is concerned with special habits, the more important it
becomes for classification. As an instance: Owen, in speaking of the
dugong, says, “The generative organs being those which are most
remotely related to the habits and food of an animal, I have always
regarded as affording very clear indications of its true affinities. We
are least likely in the modifications of these organs to mistake a
merely adaptive for an essential character.” So with plants, how
remarkable it is that the organs of vegetation, on which their whole
life depends, are of little signification, excepting in the first main
divisions; whereas the organs of reproduction, with their product the
seed, are of paramount importance!

We must not, therefore, in classifying, trust to resemblances in parts
of the organisation, however important
they may be for the welfare of the being in relation to the outer
world. Perhaps from this cause it has partly arisen, that almost all
naturalists lay the greatest stress on resemblances in organs of high
vital or physiological importance. No doubt this view of the
classificatory importance of organs which are important is generally,
but by no means always, true. But their importance for classification,
I believe, depends on their greater constancy throughout large groups
of species; and this constancy depends on such organs having generally
been subjected to less change in the adaptation of the species to their
conditions of life. That the mere physiological importance of an organ
does not determine its classificatory value, is almost shown by the one
fact, that in allied groups, in which the same organ, as we have every
reason to suppose, has nearly the same physiological value, its
classificatory value is widely different. No naturalist can have worked
at any group without being struck with this fact; and it has been most
fully acknowledged in the writings of almost every author. It will
suffice to quote the highest authority, Robert Brown, who in speaking
of certain organs in the Proteaceæ, says their generic importance,
“like that of all their parts, not only in this but, as I apprehend, in
every natural family, is very unequal, and in some cases seems to be
entirely lost.” Again in another work he says, the genera of the
Connaraceæ “differ in having one or more ovaria, in the existence or
absence of albumen, in the imbricate or valvular æstivation. Any one of
these characters singly is frequently of more than generic importance,
though here even when all taken together they appear insufficient to
separate Cnestis from Connarus.” To give an example amongst insects, in
one great division of the Hymenoptera, the antennæ, as Westwood has
remarked, are most constant in structure;
in another division they differ much, and the differences are of quite
subordinate value in classification; yet no one probably will say that
the antennæ in these two divisions of the same order are of unequal
physiological importance. Any number of instances could be given of the
varying importance for classification of the same important organ
within the same group of beings.

Again, no one will say that rudimentary or atrophied organs are of high
physiological or vital importance; yet, undoubtedly, organs in this
condition are often of high value in classification. No one will
dispute that the rudimentary teeth in the upper jaws of young
ruminants, and certain rudimentary bones of the leg, are highly
serviceable in exhibiting the close affinity between Ruminants and
Pachyderms. Robert Brown has strongly insisted on the fact that the
rudimentary florets are of the highest importance in the classification
of the Grasses.

Numerous instances could be given of characters derived from parts
which must be considered of very trifling physiological importance, but
which are universally admitted as highly serviceable in the definition
of whole groups. For instance, whether or not there is an open passage
from the nostrils to the mouth, the only character, according to Owen,
which absolutely distinguishes fishes and reptiles—the inflection of
the angle of the jaws in Marsupials—the manner in which the wings of
insects are folded—mere colour in certain Algæ—mere pubescence on parts
of the flower in grasses—the nature of the dermal covering, as hair or
feathers, in the Vertebrata. If the Ornithorhynchus had been covered
with feathers instead of hair, this external and trifling character
would, I think, have been considered by naturalists as important an aid
in determining the degree of affinity of this strange creature to
birds and reptiles, as an approach in structure in any one internal and
important organ.

The importance, for classification, of trifling characters, mainly
depends on their being correlated with several other characters of more
or less importance. The value indeed of an aggregate of characters is
very evident in natural history. Hence, as has often been remarked, a
species may depart from its allies in several characters, both of high
physiological importance and of almost universal prevalence, and yet
leave us in no doubt where it should be ranked. Hence, also, it has
been found, that a classification founded on any single character,
however important that may be, has always failed; for no part of the
organisation is universally constant. The importance of an aggregate of
characters, even when none are important, alone explains, I think, that
saying of Linnæus, that the characters do not give the genus, but the
genus gives the characters; for this saying seems founded on an
appreciation of many trifling points of resemblance, too slight to be
defined. Certain plants, belonging to the Malpighiaceæ, bear perfect
and degraded flowers; in the latter, as A. de Jussieu has remarked,
“the greater number of the characters proper to the species, to the
genus, to the family, to the class, disappear, and thus laugh at our
classification.” But when Aspicarpa produced in France, during several
years, only degraded flowers, departing so wonderfully in a number of
the most important points of structure from the proper type of the
order, yet M. Richard sagaciously saw, as Jussieu observes, that this
genus should still be retained amongst the Malpighiaceæ. This case
seems to me well to illustrate the spirit with which our
classifications are sometimes necessarily founded.

Practically when naturalists are at work, they do
not trouble themselves about the physiological value of the characters
which they use in defining a group, or in allocating any particular
species. If they find a character nearly uniform, and common to a great
number of forms, and not common to others, they use it as one of high
value; if common to some lesser number, they use it as of subordinate
value. This principle has been broadly confessed by some naturalists to
be the true one; and by none more clearly than by that excellent
botanist, Aug. St. Hilaire. If certain characters are always found
correlated with others, though no apparent bond of connexion can be
discovered between them, especial value is set on them. As in most
groups of animals, important organs, such as those for propelling the
blood, or for ærating it, or those for propagating the race, are found
nearly uniform, they are considered as highly serviceable in
classification; but in some groups of animals all these, the most
important vital organs, are found to offer characters of quite
subordinate value.

We can see why characters derived from the embryo should be of equal
importance with those derived from the adult, for our classifications
of course include all ages of each species. But it is by no means
obvious, on the ordinary view, why the structure of the embryo should
be more important for this purpose than that of the adult, which alone
plays its full part in the economy of nature. Yet it has been strongly
urged by those great naturalists, Milne Edwards and Agassiz, that
embryonic characters are the most important of any in the
classification of animals; and this doctrine has very generally been
admitted as true. The same fact holds good with flowering plants, of
which the two main divisions have been founded on characters derived
from the embryo,—on the number and position of the embryonic
leaves or cotyledons, and on the mode of development of the plumule and
radicle. In our discussion on embryology, we shall see why such
characters are so valuable, on the view of classification tacitly
including the idea of descent.

Our classifications are often plainly influenced by chains of
affinities. Nothing can be easier than to define a number of characters
common to all birds; but in the case of crustaceans, such definition
has hitherto been found impossible. There are crustaceans at the
opposite ends of the series, which have hardly a character in common;
yet the species at both ends, from being plainly allied to others, and
these to others, and so onwards, can be recognised as unequivocally
belonging to this, and to no other class of the Articulata.

Geographical distribution has often been used, though perhaps not quite
logically, in classification, more especially in very large groups of
closely allied forms. Temminck insists on the utility or even necessity
of this practice in certain groups of birds; and it has been followed
by several entomologists and botanists.

Finally, with respect to the comparative value of the various groups of
species, such as orders, sub-orders, families, sub-families, and
genera, they seem to be, at least at present, almost arbitrary. Several
of the best botanists, such as Mr. Bentham and others, have strongly
insisted on their arbitrary value. Instances could be given amongst
plants and insects, of a group of forms, first ranked by practised
naturalists as only a genus, and then raised to the rank of a
sub-family or family; and this has been done, not because further
research has detected important structural differences, at first
overlooked, but because numerous allied species, with slightly
different grades of difference, have been subsequently discovered.


All the foregoing rules and aids and difficulties in classification are
explained, if I do not greatly deceive myself, on the view that the
natural system is founded on descent with modification; that the
characters which naturalists consider as showing true affinity between
any two or more species, are those which have been inherited from a
common parent, and, in so far, all true classification is genealogical;
that community of descent is the hidden bond which naturalists have
been unconsciously seeking, and not some unknown plan of creation, or
the enunciation of general propositions, and the mere putting together
and separating objects more or less alike.

But I must explain my meaning more fully. I believe that the
_arrangement_ of the groups within each class, in due subordination and
relation to the other groups, must be strictly genealogical in order to
be natural; but that the _amount_ of difference in the several branches
or groups, though allied in the same degree in blood to their common
progenitor, may differ greatly, being due to the different degrees of
modification which they have undergone; and this is expressed by the
forms being ranked under different genera, families, sections, or
orders. The reader will best understand what is meant, if he will take
the trouble of referring to the diagram in the fourth chapter. We will
suppose the letters A to L to represent allied genera, which lived
during the Silurian epoch, and these have descended from a species
which existed at an unknown anterior period. Species of three of these
genera (A, F, and I) have transmitted modified descendants to the
present day, represented by the fifteen genera (_a_14 to _z_14) on the
uppermost horizontal line. Now all these modified descendants from a
single species, are represented as related in blood or descent to the
same
degree; they may metaphorically be called cousins to the same millionth
degree; yet they differ widely and in different degrees from each
other. The forms descended from A, now broken up into two or three
families, constitute a distinct order from those descended from I, also
broken up into two families. Nor can the existing species, descended
from A, be ranked in the same genus with the parent A; or those from I,
with the parent I. But the existing genus F14 may be supposed to have
been but slightly modified; and it will then rank with the parent-genus
F; just as some few still living organic beings belong to Silurian
genera. So that the amount or value of the differences between organic
beings all related to each other in the same degree in blood, has come
to be widely different. Nevertheless their genealogical _arrangement_
remains strictly true, not only at the present time, but at each
successive period of descent. All the modified descendants from A will
have inherited something in common from their common parent, as will
all the descendants from I; so will it be with each subordinate branch
of descendants, at each successive period. If, however, we choose to
suppose that any of the descendants of A or of I have been so much
modified as to have more or less completely lost traces of their
parentage, in this case, their places in a natural classification will
have been more or less completely lost,—as sometimes seems to have
occurred with existing organisms. All the descendants of the genus F,
along its whole line of descent, are supposed to have been but little
modified, and they yet form a single genus. But this genus, though much
isolated, will still occupy its proper intermediate position; for F
originally was intermediate in character between A and I, and the
several genera descended from these two genera will
have inherited to a certain extent their characters. This natural
arrangement is shown, as far as is possible on paper, in the diagram,
but in much too simple a manner. If a branching diagram had not been
used, and only the names of the groups had been written in a linear
series, it would have been still less possible to have given a natural
arrangement; and it is notoriously not possible to represent in a
series, on a flat surface, the affinities which we discover in nature
amongst the beings of the same group. Thus, on the view which I hold,
the natural system is genealogical in its arrangement, like a pedigree;
but the degrees of modification which the different groups have
undergone, have to be expressed by ranking them under different
so-called genera, sub-families, families, sections, orders, and
classes.

It may be worth while to illustrate this view of classification, by
taking the case of languages. If we possessed a perfect pedigree of
mankind, a genealogical arrangement of the races of man would afford
the best classification of the various languages now spoken throughout
the world; and if all extinct languages, and all intermediate and
slowly changing dialects, had to be included, such an arrangement
would, I think, be the only possible one. Yet it might be that some
very ancient language had altered little, and had given rise to few new
languages, whilst others (owing to the spreading and subsequent
isolation and states of civilisation of the several races, descended
from a common race) had altered much, and had given rise to many new
languages and dialects. The various degrees of difference in the
languages from the same stock, would have to be expressed by groups
subordinate to groups; but the proper or even only possible arrangement
would still be genealogical; and this would be strictly natural, as
it would connect together all languages, extinct and modern, by the
closest affinities, and would give the filiation and origin of each
tongue.

In confirmation of this view, let us glance at the classification of
varieties, which are believed or known to have descended from one
species. These are grouped under species, with sub-varieties under
varieties; and with our domestic productions, several other grades of
difference are requisite, as we have seen with pigeons. The origin of
the existence of groups subordinate to groups, is the same with
varieties as with species, namely, closeness of descent with various
degrees of modification. Nearly the same rules are followed in
classifying varieties, as with species. Authors have insisted on the
necessity of classing varieties on a natural instead of an artificial
system; we are cautioned, for instance, not to class two varieties of
the pine-apple together, merely because their fruit, though the most
important part, happens to be nearly identical; no one puts the swedish
and common turnips together, though the esculent and thickened stems
are so similar. Whatever part is found to be most constant, is used in
classing varieties: thus the great agriculturist Marshall says the
horns are very useful for this purpose with cattle, because they are
less variable than the shape or colour of the body, etc.; whereas with
sheep the horns are much less serviceable, because less constant. In
classing varieties, I apprehend if we had a real pedigree, a
genealogical classification would be universally preferred; and it has
been attempted by some authors. For we might feel sure, whether there
had been more or less modification, the principle of inheritance would
keep the forms together which were allied in the greatest number of
points. In tumbler pigeons, though some sub-varieties differ from the
others
in the important character of having a longer beak, yet all are kept
together from having the common habit of tumbling; but the short-faced
breed has nearly or quite lost this habit; nevertheless, without any
reasoning or thinking on the subject, these tumblers are kept in the
same group, because allied in blood and alike in some other respects.
If it could be proved that the Hottentot had descended from the Negro,
I think he would be classed under the Negro group, however much he
might differ in colour and other important characters from negroes.

With species in a state of nature, every naturalist has in fact brought
descent into his classification; for he includes in his lowest grade,
or that of a species, the two sexes; and how enormously these sometimes
differ in the most important characters, is known to every naturalist:
scarcely a single fact can be predicated in common of the males and
hermaphrodites of certain cirripedes, when adult, and yet no one dreams
of separating them. The naturalist includes as one species the several
larval stages of the same individual, however much they may differ from
each other and from the adult; as he likewise includes the so-called
alternate generations of Steenstrup, which can only in a technical
sense be considered as the same individual. He includes monsters; he
includes varieties, not solely because they closely resemble the
parent-form, but because they are descended from it. He who believes
that the cowslip is descended from the primrose, or conversely, ranks
them together as a single species, and gives a single definition. As
soon as three Orchidean forms (Monochanthus, Myanthus, and Catasetum),
which had previously been ranked as three distinct genera, were known
to be sometimes produced on the same spike, they were immediately
included as a single species.
But it may be asked, what ought we to do, if it could be proved that
one species of kangaroo had been produced, by a long course of
modification, from a bear? Ought we to rank this one species with
bears, and what should we do with the other species? The supposition is
of course preposterous; and I might answer by the _argumentum ad
hominem_, and ask what should be done if a perfect kangaroo were seen
to come out of the womb of a bear? According to all analogy, it would
be ranked with bears; but then assuredly all the other species of the
kangaroo family would have to be classed under the bear genus. The
whole case is preposterous; for where there has been close descent in
common, there will certainly be close resemblance or affinity.

As descent has universally been used in classing together the
individuals of the same species, though the males and females and larvæ
are sometimes extremely different; and as it has been used in classing
varieties which have undergone a certain, and sometimes a considerable
amount of modification, may not this same element of descent have been
unconsciously used in grouping species under genera, and genera under
higher groups, though in these cases the modification has been greater
in degree, and has taken a longer time to complete? I believe it has
thus been unconsciously used; and only thus can I understand the
several rules and guides which have been followed by our best
systematists. We have no written pedigrees; we have to make out
community of descent by resemblances of any kind. Therefore we choose
those characters which, as far as we can judge, are the least likely to
have been modified in relation to the conditions of life to which each
species has been recently exposed. Rudimentary structures on this view
are as good as, or even sometimes better than, other parts of the
organisation. We
care not how trifling a character may be—let it be the mere inflection
of the angle of the jaw, the manner in which an insect’s wing is
folded, whether the skin be covered by hair or feathers—if it prevail
throughout many and different species, especially those having very
different habits of life, it assumes high value; for we can account for
its presence in so many forms with such different habits, only by its
inheritance from a common parent. We may err in this respect in regard
to single points of structure, but when several characters, let them be
ever so trifling, occur together throughout a large group of beings
having different habits, we may feel almost sure, on the theory of
descent, that these characters have been inherited from a common
ancestor. And we know that such correlated or aggregated characters
have especial value in classification.

We can understand why a species or a group of species may depart, in
several of its most important characteristics, from its allies, and yet
be safely classed with them. This may be safely done, and is often
done, as long as a sufficient number of characters, let them be ever so
unimportant, betrays the hidden bond of community of descent. Let two
forms have not a single character in common, yet if these extreme forms
are connected together by a chain of intermediate groups, we may at
once infer their community of descent, and we put them all into the
same class. As we find organs of high physiological importance—those
which serve to preserve life under the most diverse conditions of
existence—are generally the most constant, we attach especial value to
them; but if these same organs, in another group or section of a group,
are found to differ much, we at once value them less in our
classification. We shall hereafter, I think, clearly see why
embryological characters are of such high classificatory importance.
Geographical distribution may sometimes be brought usefully into play
in classing large and widely-distributed genera, because all the
species of the same genus, inhabiting any distinct and isolated region,
have in all probability descended from the same parents.

We can understand, on these views, the very important distinction
between real affinities and analogical or adaptive resemblances.
Lamarck first called attention to this distinction, and he has been
ably followed by Macleay and others. The resemblance, in the shape of
the body and in the fin-like anterior limbs, between the dugong, which
is a pachydermatous animal, and the whale, and between both these
mammals and fishes, is analogical. Amongst insects there are
innumerable instances: thus Linnæus, misled by external appearances,
actually classed an homopterous insect as a moth. We see something of
the same kind even in our domestic varieties, as in the thickened stems
of the common and swedish turnip. The resemblance of the greyhound and
racehorse is hardly more fanciful than the analogies which have been
drawn by some authors between very distinct animals. On my view of
characters being of real importance for classification, only in so far
as they reveal descent, we can clearly understand why analogical or
adaptive character, although of the utmost importance to the welfare of
the being, are almost valueless to the systematist. For animals,
belonging to two most distinct lines of descent, may readily become
adapted to similar conditions, and thus assume a close external
resemblance; but such resemblances will not reveal—will rather tend to
conceal their blood-relationship to their proper lines of descent. We
can also understand the apparent paradox, that the very same characters
are analogical when one class or order is compared with another, but
give true affinities when the members of
the same class or order are compared one with another: thus the shape
of the body and fin-like limbs are only analogical when whales are
compared with fishes, being adaptations in both classes for swimming
through the water; but the shape of the body and fin-like limbs serve
as characters exhibiting true affinity between the several members of
the whale family; for these cetaceans agree in so many characters,
great and small, that we cannot doubt that they have inherited their
general shape of body and structure of limbs from a common ancestor. So
it is with fishes.

As members of distinct classes have often been adapted by successive
slight modifications to live under nearly similar circumstances,—to
inhabit for instance the three elements of land, air, and water,—we can
perhaps understand how it is that a numerical parallelism has sometimes
been observed between the sub-groups in distinct classes. A naturalist,
struck by a parallelism of this nature in any one class, by arbitrarily
raising or sinking the value of the groups in other classes (and all
our experience shows that this valuation has hitherto been arbitrary),
could easily extend the parallelism over a wide range; and thus the
septenary, quinary, quaternary, and ternary classifications have
probably arisen.

As the modified descendants of dominant species, belonging to the
larger genera, tend to inherit the advantages, which made the groups to
which they belong large and their parents dominant, they are almost
sure to spread widely, and to seize on more and more places in the
economy of nature. The larger and more dominant groups thus tend to go
on increasing in size; and they consequently supplant many smaller and
feebler groups. Thus we can account for the fact that all organisms,
recent and extinct, are included under a few great
orders, under still fewer classes, and all in one great natural system.
As showing how few the higher groups are in number, and how widely
spread they are throughout the world, the fact is striking, that the
discovery of Australia has not added a single insect belonging to a new
order; and that in the vegetable kingdom, as I learn from Dr. Hooker,
it has added only two or three orders of small size.

In the chapter on geological succession I attempted to show, on the
principle of each group having generally diverged much in character
during the long-continued process of modification, how it is that the
more ancient forms of life often present characters in some slight
degree intermediate between existing groups. A few old and intermediate
parent-forms having occasionally transmitted to the present day
descendants but little modified, will give to us our so-called osculant
or aberrant groups. The more aberrant any form is, the greater must be
the number of connecting forms which on my theory have been
exterminated and utterly lost. And we have some evidence of aberrant
forms having suffered severely from extinction, for they are generally
represented by extremely few species; and such species as do occur are
generally very distinct from each other, which again implies
extinction. The genera Ornithorhynchus and Lepidosiren, for example,
would not have been less aberrant had each been represented by a dozen
species instead of by a single one; but such richness in species, as I
find after some investigation, does not commonly fall to the lot of
aberrant genera. We can, I think, account for this fact only by looking
at aberrant forms as failing groups conquered by more successful
competitors, with a few members preserved by some unusual coincidence
of favourable circumstances.

Mr. Waterhouse has remarked that, when a member
belonging to one group of animals exhibits an affinity to a quite
distinct group, this affinity in most cases is general and not special:
thus, according to Mr. Waterhouse, of all Rodents, the bizcacha is most
nearly related to Marsupials; but in the points in which it approaches
this order, its relations are general, and not to any one marsupial
species more than to another. As the points of affinity of the bizcacha
to Marsupials are believed to be real and not merely adaptive, they are
due on my theory to inheritance in common. Therefore we must suppose
either that all Rodents, including the bizcacha, branched off from some
very ancient Marsupial, which will have had a character in some degree
intermediate with respect to all existing Marsupials; or that both
Rodents and Marsupials branched off from a common progenitor, and that
both groups have since undergone much modification in divergent
directions. On either view we may suppose that the bizcacha has
retained, by inheritance, more of the character of its ancient
progenitor than have other Rodents; and therefore it will not be
specially related to any one existing Marsupial, but indirectly to all
or nearly all Marsupials, from having partially retained the character
of their common progenitor, or of an early member of the group. On the
other hand, of all Marsupials, as Mr. Waterhouse has remarked, the
phascolomys resembles most nearly, not any one species, but the general
order of Rodents. In this case, however, it may be strongly suspected
that the resemblance is only analogical, owing to the phascolomys
having become adapted to habits like those of a Rodent. The elder De
Candolle has made nearly similar observations on the general nature of
the affinities of distinct orders of plants.

On the principle of the multiplication and gradual divergence in
character of the species descended from
a common parent, together with their retention by inheritance of some
characters in common, we can understand the excessively complex and
radiating affinities by which all the members of the same family or
higher group are connected together. For the common parent of a whole
family of species, now broken up by extinction into distinct groups and
sub-groups, will have transmitted some of its characters, modified in
various ways and degrees, to all; and the several species will
consequently be related to each other by circuitous lines of affinity
of various lengths (as may be seen in the diagram so often referred
to), mounting up through many predecessors. As it is difficult to show
the blood-relationship between the numerous kindred of any ancient and
noble family, even by the aid of a genealogical tree, and almost
impossible to do this without this aid, we can understand the
extraordinary difficulty which naturalists have experienced in
describing, without the aid of a diagram, the various affinities which
they perceive between the many living and extinct members of the same
great natural class.

Extinction, as we have seen in the fourth chapter, has played an
important part in defining and widening the intervals between the
several groups in each class. We may thus account even for the
distinctness of whole classes from each other—for instance, of birds
from all other vertebrate animals—by the belief that many ancient forms
of life have been utterly lost, through which the early progenitors of
birds were formerly connected with the early progenitors of the other
vertebrate classes. There has been less entire extinction of the forms
of life which once connected fishes with batrachians. There has been
still less in some other classes, as in that of the Crustacea, for here
the most wonderfully diverse forms are still tied
together by a long, but broken, chain of affinities. Extinction has
only separated groups: it has by no means made them; for if every form
which has ever lived on this earth were suddenly to reappear, though it
would be quite impossible to give definitions by which each group could
be distinguished from other groups, as all would blend together by
steps as fine as those between the finest existing varieties,
nevertheless a natural classification, or at least a natural
arrangement, would be possible. We shall see this by turning to the
diagram: the letters, A to L, may represent eleven Silurian genera,
some of which have produced large groups of modified descendants. Every
intermediate link between these eleven genera and their primordial
parent, and every intermediate link in each branch and sub-branch of
their descendants, may be supposed to be still alive; and the links to
be as fine as those between the finest varieties. In this case it would
be quite impossible to give any definition by which the several members
of the several groups could be distinguished from their more immediate
parents; or these parents from their ancient and unknown progenitor.
Yet the natural arrangement in the diagram would still hold good; and,
on the principle of inheritance, all the forms descended from A, or
from I, would have something in common. In a tree we can specify this
or that branch, though at the actual fork the two unite and blend
together. We could not, as I have said, define the several groups; but
we could pick out types, or forms, representing most of the characters
of each group, whether large or small, and thus give a general idea of
the value of the differences between them. This is what we should be
driven to, if we were ever to succeed in collecting all the forms in
any class which have lived throughout all time and space. We shall
certainly never succeed in making
so perfect a collection: nevertheless, in certain classes, we are
tending in this direction; and Milne Edwards has lately insisted, in an
able paper, on the high importance of looking to types, whether or not
we can separate and define the groups to which such types belong.

Finally, we have seen that natural selection, which results from the
struggle for existence, and which almost inevitably induces extinction
and divergence of character in the many descendants from one dominant
parent-species, explains that great and universal feature in the
affinities of all organic beings, namely, their subordination in group
under group. We use the element of descent in classing the individuals
of both sexes and of all ages, although having few characters in
common, under one species; we use descent in classing acknowledged
varieties, however different they may be from their parent; and I
believe this element of descent is the hidden bond of connexion which
naturalists have sought under the term of the Natural System. On this
idea of the natural system being, in so far as it has been perfected,
genealogical in its arrangement, with the grades of difference between
the descendants from a common parent, expressed by the terms genera,
families, orders, etc., we can understand the rules which we are
compelled to follow in our classification. We can understand why we
value certain resemblances far more than others; why we are permitted
to use rudimentary and useless organs, or others of trifling
physiological importance; why, in comparing one group with a distinct
group, we summarily reject analogical or adaptive characters, and yet
use these same characters within the limits of the same group. We can
clearly see how it is that all living and extinct forms can be grouped
together in one great system; and how the several members of each class
are connected together by the most complex and radiating
lines of affinities. We shall never, probably, disentangle the
inextricable web of affinities between the members of any one class;
but when we have a distinct object in view, and do not look to some
unknown plan of creation, we may hope to make sure but slow progress.

_Morphology_.—We have seen that the members of the same class,
independently of their habits of life, resemble each other in the
general plan of their organisation. This resemblance is often expressed
by the term “unity of type;” or by saying that the several parts and
organs in the different species of the class are homologous. The whole
subject is included under the general name of Morphology. This is the
most interesting department of natural history, and may be said to be
its very soul. What can be more curious than that the hand of a man,
formed for grasping, that of a mole for digging, the leg of the horse,
the paddle of the porpoise, and the wing of the bat, should all be
constructed on the same pattern, and should include the same bones, in
the same relative positions? Geoffroy St. Hilaire has insisted strongly
on the high importance of relative connexion in homologous organs: the
parts may change to almost any extent in form and size, and yet they
always remain connected together in the same order. We never find, for
instance, the bones of the arm and forearm, or of the thigh and leg,
transposed. Hence the same names can be given to the homologous bones
in widely different animals. We see the same great law in the
construction of the mouths of insects: what can be more different than
the immensely long spiral proboscis of a sphinx-moth, the curious
folded one of a bee or bug, and the great jaws of a beetle?—yet all
these organs, serving for such different
purposes, are formed by infinitely numerous modifications of an upper
lip, mandibles, and two pairs of maxillæ. Analogous laws govern the
construction of the mouths and limbs of crustaceans. So it is with the
flowers of plants.

Nothing can be more hopeless than to attempt to explain this similarity
of pattern in members of the same class, by utility or by the doctrine
of final causes. The hopelessness of the attempt has been expressly
admitted by Owen in his most interesting work on the ‘Nature of Limbs.’
On the ordinary view of the independent creation of each being, we can
only say that so it is;—that it has so pleased the Creator to construct
each animal and plant.

The explanation is manifest on the theory of the natural selection of
successive slight modifications,—each modification being profitable in
some way to the modified form, but often affecting by correlation of
growth other parts of the organisation. In changes of this nature,
there will be little or no tendency to modify the original pattern, or
to transpose parts. The bones of a limb might be shortened and widened
to any extent, and become gradually enveloped in thick membrane, so as
to serve as a fin; or a webbed foot might have all its bones, or
certain bones, lengthened to any extent, and the membrane connecting
them increased to any extent, so as to serve as a wing: yet in all this
great amount of modification there will be no tendency to alter the
framework of bones or the relative connexion of the several parts. If
we suppose that the ancient progenitor, the archetype as it may be
called, of all mammals, had its limbs constructed on the existing
general pattern, for whatever purpose they served, we can at once
perceive the plain signification of the homologous construction of the
limbs throughout the whole class. So with the mouths of insects, we
have only to
suppose that their common progenitor had an upper lip, mandibles, and
two pair of maxillæ, these parts being perhaps very simple in form; and
then natural selection will account for the infinite diversity in
structure and function of the mouths of insects. Nevertheless, it is
conceivable that the general pattern of an organ might become so much
obscured as to be finally lost, by the atrophy and ultimately by the
complete abortion of certain parts, by the soldering together of other
parts, and by the doubling or multiplication of others,—variations
which we know to be within the limits of possibility. In the paddles of
the extinct gigantic sea-lizards, and in the mouths of certain
suctorial crustaceans, the general pattern seems to have been thus to a
certain extent obscured.

There is another and equally curious branch of the present subject;
namely, the comparison not of the same part in different members of a
class, but of the different parts or organs in the same individual.
Most physiologists believe that the bones of the skull are homologous
with—that is correspond in number and in relative connexion with—the
elemental parts of a certain number of vertebræ. The anterior and
posterior limbs in each member of the vertebrate and articulate classes
are plainly homologous. We see the same law in comparing the
wonderfully complex jaws and legs in crustaceans. It is familiar to
almost every one, that in a flower the relative position of the sepals,
petals, stamens, and pistils, as well as their intimate structure, are
intelligible on the view that they consist of metamorphosed leaves,
arranged in a spire. In monstrous plants, we often get direct evidence
of the possibility of one organ being transformed into another; and we
can actually see in embryonic crustaceans and in many other animals,
and in flowers, that organs, which when mature
become extremely different, are at an early stage of growth exactly
alike.

How inexplicable are these facts on the ordinary view of creation! Why
should the brain be enclosed in a box composed of such numerous and
such extraordinarily shaped pieces of bone? As Owen has remarked, the
benefit derived from the yielding of the separate pieces in the act of
parturition of mammals, will by no means explain the same construction
in the skulls of birds. Why should similar bones have been created in
the formation of the wing and leg of a bat, used as they are for such
totally different purposes? Why should one crustacean, which has an
extremely complex mouth formed of many parts, consequently always have
fewer legs; or conversely, those with many legs have simpler mouths?
Why should the sepals, petals, stamens, and pistils in any individual
flower, though fitted for such widely different purposes, be all
constructed on the same pattern?

On the theory of natural selection, we can satisfactorily answer these
questions. In the vertebrata, we see a series of internal vertebræ
bearing certain processes and appendages; in the articulata, we see the
body divided into a series of segments, bearing external appendages;
and in flowering plants, we see a series of successive spiral whorls of
leaves. An indefinite repetition of the same part or organ is the
common characteristic (as Owen has observed) of all low or
little-modified forms; therefore we may readily believe that the
unknown progenitor of the vertebrata possessed many vertebræ; the
unknown progenitor of the articulata, many segments; and the unknown
progenitor of flowering plants, many spiral whorls of leaves. We have
formerly seen that parts many times repeated are eminently liable to
vary in number and structure; consequently it is quite probable that
natural selection, during a long-continued course of modification,
should have seized on a certain number of the primordially similar
elements, many times repeated, and have adapted them to the most
diverse purposes. And as the whole amount of modification will have
been effected by slight successive steps, we need not wonder at
discovering in such parts or organs, a certain degree of fundamental
resemblance, retained by the strong principle of inheritance.

In the great class of molluscs, though we can homologise the parts of
one species with those of another and distinct species, we can indicate
but few serial homologies; that is, we are seldom enabled to say that
one part or organ is homologous with another in the same individual.
And we can understand this fact; for in molluscs, even in the lowest
members of the class, we do not find nearly so much indefinite
repetition of any one part, as we find in the other great classes of
the animal and vegetable kingdoms.

Naturalists frequently speak of the skull as formed of metamorphosed
vertebræ: the jaws of crabs as metamorphosed legs; the stamens and
pistils of flowers as metamorphosed leaves; but it would in these cases
probably be more correct, as Professor Huxley has remarked, to speak of
both skull and vertebræ, both jaws and legs, etc.,—as having been
metamorphosed, not one from the other, but from some common element.
Naturalists, however, use such language only in a metaphorical sense:
they are far from meaning that during a long course of descent,
primordial organs of any kind—vertebræ in the one case and legs in the
other—have actually been modified into skulls or jaws. Yet so strong is
the appearance of a modification of this nature having occurred, that
naturalists can hardly avoid employing language having this plain
signification. On my view
these terms may be used literally; and the wonderful fact of the jaws,
for instance, of a crab retaining numerous characters, which they would
probably have retained through inheritance, if they had really been
metamorphosed during a long course of descent from true legs, or from
some simple appendage, is explained.

_Embryology_.—It has already been casually remarked that certain organs
in the individual, which when mature become widely different and serve
for different purposes, are in the embryo exactly alike. The embryos,
also, of distinct animals within the same class are often strikingly
similar: a better proof of this cannot be given, than a circumstance
mentioned by Agassiz, namely, that having forgotten to ticket the
embryo of some vertebrate animal, he cannot now tell whether it be that
of a mammal, bird, or reptile. The vermiform larvæ of moths, flies,
beetles, etc., resemble each other much more closely than do the mature
insects; but in the case of larvæ, the embryos are active, and have
been adapted for special lines of life. A trace of the law of embryonic
resemblance, sometimes lasts till a rather late age: thus birds of the
same genus, and of closely allied genera, often resemble each other in
their first and second plumage; as we see in the spotted feathers in
the thrush group. In the cat tribe, most of the species are striped or
spotted in lines; and stripes can be plainly distinguished in the whelp
of the lion. We occasionally though rarely see something of this kind
in plants: thus the embryonic leaves of the ulex or furze, and the
first leaves of the phyllodineous acaceas, are pinnate or divided like
the ordinary leaves of the leguminosæ.

The points of structure, in which the embryos of widely different
animals of the same class resemble each other, often have no direct
relation to their conditions
of existence. We cannot, for instance, suppose that in the embryos of
the vertebrata the peculiar loop-like course of the arteries near the
branchial slits are related to similar conditions,—in the young mammal
which is nourished in the womb of its mother, in the egg of the bird
which is hatched in a nest, and in the spawn of a frog under water. We
have no more reason to believe in such a relation, than we have to
believe that the same bones in the hand of a man, wing of a bat, and
fin of a porpoise, are related to similar conditions of life. No one
will suppose that the stripes on the whelp of a lion, or the spots on
the young blackbird, are of any use to these animals, or are related to
the conditions to which they are exposed.

The case, however, is different when an animal during any part of its
embryonic career is active, and has to provide for itself. The period
of activity may come on earlier or later in life; but whenever it comes
on, the adaptation of the larva to its conditions of life is just as
perfect and as beautiful as in the adult animal. From such special
adaptations, the similarity of the larvæ or active embryos of allied
animals is sometimes much obscured; and cases could be given of the
larvæ of two species, or of two groups of species, differing quite as
much, or even more, from each other than do their adult parents. In
most cases, however, the larvæ, though active, still obey more or less
closely the law of common embryonic resemblance. Cirripedes afford a
good instance of this: even the illustrious Cuvier did not perceive
that a barnacle was, as it certainly is, a crustacean; but a glance at
the larva shows this to be the case in an unmistakeable manner. So
again the two main divisions of cirripedes, the pedunculated and
sessile, which differ widely in external appearance, have larvæ in all
their several stages barely distinguishable.


The embryo in the course of development generally rises in
organisation: I use this expression, though I am aware that it is
hardly possible to define clearly what is meant by the organisation
being higher or lower. But no one probably will dispute that the
butterfly is higher than the caterpillar. In some cases, however, the
mature animal is generally considered as lower in the scale than the
larva, as with certain parasitic crustaceans. To refer once again to
cirripedes: the larvæ in the first stage have three pairs of legs, a
very simple single eye, and a probosciformed mouth, with which they
feed largely, for they increase much in size. In the second stage,
answering to the chrysalis stage of butterflies, they have six pairs of
beautifully constructed natatory legs, a pair of magnificent compound
eyes, and extremely complex antennæ; but they have a closed and
imperfect mouth, and cannot feed: their function at this stage is, to
search by their well-developed organs of sense, and to reach by their
active powers of swimming, a proper place on which to become attached
and to undergo their final metamorphosis. When this is completed they
are fixed for life: their legs are now converted into prehensile
organs; they again obtain a well-constructed mouth; but they have no
antennæ, and their two eyes are now reconverted into a minute, single,
and very simple eye-spot. In this last and complete state, cirripedes
may be considered as either more highly or more lowly organised than
they were in the larval condition. But in some genera the larvæ become
developed either into hermaphrodites having the ordinary structure, or
into what I have called complemental males: and in the latter, the
development has assuredly been retrograde; for the male is a mere sack,
which lives for a short time, and is destitute of mouth, stomach, or
other organ of importance, excepting for reproduction.


We are so much accustomed to see differences in structure between the
embryo and the adult, and likewise a close similarity in the embryos of
widely different animals within the same class, that we might be led to
look at these facts as necessarily contingent in some manner on growth.
But there is no obvious reason why, for instance, the wing of a bat, or
the fin of a porpoise, should not have been sketched out with all the
parts in proper proportion, as soon as any structure became visible in
the embryo. And in some whole groups of animals and in certain members
of other groups, the embryo does not at any period differ widely from
the adult: thus Owen has remarked in regard to cuttle-fish, “there is
no metamorphosis; the cephalopodic character is manifested long before
the parts of the embryo are completed;” and again in spiders, “there is
nothing worthy to be called a metamorphosis.” The larvæ of insects,
whether adapted to the most diverse and active habits, or quite
inactive, being fed by their parents or placed in the midst of proper
nutriment, yet nearly all pass through a similar worm-like stage of
development; but in some few cases, as in that of Aphis, if we look to
the admirable drawings by Professor Huxley of the development of this
insect, we see no trace of the vermiform stage.

How, then, can we explain these several facts in embryology,—namely the
very general, but not universal difference in structure between the
embryo and the adult;—of parts in the same individual embryo, which
ultimately become very unlike and serve for diverse purposes, being at
this early period of growth alike;—of embryos of different species
within the same class, generally, but not universally, resembling each
other;—of the structure of the embryo not being closely related to its
conditions of existence, except when the
embryo becomes at any period of life active and has to provide for
itself;—of the embryo apparently having sometimes a higher organisation
than the mature animal, into which it is developed. I believe that all
these facts can be explained, as follows, on the view of descent with
modification.

It is commonly assumed, perhaps from monstrosities often affecting the
embryo at a very early period, that slight variations necessarily
appear at an equally early period. But we have little evidence on this
head—indeed the evidence rather points the other way; for it is
notorious that breeders of cattle, horses, and various fancy animals,
cannot positively tell, until some time after the animal has been born,
what its merits or form will ultimately turn out. We see this plainly
in our own children; we cannot always tell whether the child will be
tall or short, or what its precise features will be. The question is
not, at what period of life any variation has been caused, but at what
period it is fully displayed. The cause may have acted, and I believe
generally has acted, even before the embryo is formed; and the
variation may be due to the male and female sexual elements having been
affected by the conditions to which either parent, or their ancestors,
have been exposed. Nevertheless an effect thus caused at a very early
period, even before the formation of the embryo, may appear late in
life; as when an hereditary disease, which appears in old age alone,
has been communicated to the offspring from the reproductive element of
one parent. Or again, as when the horns of cross-bred cattle have been
affected by the shape of the horns of either parent. For the welfare of
a very young animal, as long as it remains in its mother’s womb, or in
the egg, or as long as it is nourished and protected by its parent, it
must be quite unimportant whether most of its characters are fully
acquired a little earlier or later in life. It would not signify, for
instance, to a bird which obtained its food best by having a long beak,
whether or not it assumed a beak of this particular length, as long as
it was fed by its parents. Hence, I conclude, that it is quite
possible, that each of the many successive modifications, by which each
species has acquired its present structure, may have supervened at a
not very early period of life; and some direct evidence from our
domestic animals supports this view. But in other cases it is quite
possible that each successive modification, or most of them, may have
appeared at an extremely early period.

I have stated in the first chapter, that there is some evidence to
render it probable, that at whatever age any variation first appears in
the parent, it tends to reappear at a corresponding age in the
offspring. Certain variations can only appear at corresponding ages,
for instance, peculiarities in the caterpillar, cocoon, or imago states
of the silk-moth; or, again, in the horns of almost full-grown cattle.
But further than this, variations which, for all that we can see, might
have appeared earlier or later in life, tend to appear at a
corresponding age in the offspring and parent. I am far from meaning
that this is invariably the case; and I could give a good many cases of
variations (taking the word in the largest sense) which have supervened
at an earlier age in the child than in the parent.

These two principles, if their truth be admitted, will, I believe,
explain all the above specified leading facts in embryology. But first
let us look at a few analogous cases in domestic varieties. Some
authors who have written on Dogs, maintain that the greyhound and
bulldog, though appearing so different, are really varieties most
closely allied, and have probably descended from
the same wild stock; hence I was curious to see how far their puppies
differed from each other: I was told by breeders that they differed
just as much as their parents, and this, judging by the eye, seemed
almost to be the case; but on actually measuring the old dogs and their
six-days old puppies, I found that the puppies had not nearly acquired
their full amount of proportional difference. So, again, I was told
that the foals of cart and race-horses differed as much as the
full-grown animals; and this surprised me greatly, as I think it
probable that the difference between these two breeds has been wholly
caused by selection under domestication; but having had careful
measurements made of the dam and of a three-days old colt of a race and
heavy cart-horse, I find that the colts have by no means acquired their
full amount of proportional difference.

As the evidence appears to me conclusive, that the several domestic
breeds of Pigeon have descended from one wild species, I compared young
pigeons of various breeds, within twelve hours after being hatched; I
carefully measured the proportions (but will not here give details) of
the beak, width of mouth, length of nostril and of eyelid, size of feet
and length of leg, in the wild stock, in pouters, fantails, runts,
barbs, dragons, carriers, and tumblers. Now some of these birds, when
mature, differ so extraordinarily in length and form of beak, that they
would, I cannot doubt, be ranked in distinct genera, had they been
natural productions. But when the nestling birds of these several
breeds were placed in a row, though most of them could be distinguished
from each other, yet their proportional differences in the above
specified several points were incomparably less than in the full-grown
birds. Some characteristic points of difference—for instance, that of
the width of mouth—could hardly be detected in the young.
But there was one remarkable exception to this rule, for the young of
the short-faced tumbler differed from the young of the wild rock-pigeon
and of the other breeds, in all its proportions, almost exactly as much
as in the adult state.

The two principles above given seem to me to explain these facts in
regard to the later embryonic stages of our domestic varieties.
Fanciers select their horses, dogs, and pigeons, for breeding, when
they are nearly grown up: they are indifferent whether the desired
qualities and structures have been acquired earlier or later in life,
if the full-grown animal possesses them. And the cases just given, more
especially that of pigeons, seem to show that the characteristic
differences which give value to each breed, and which have been
accumulated by man’s selection, have not generally first appeared at an
early period of life, and have been inherited by the offspring at a
corresponding not early period. But the case of the short-faced
tumbler, which when twelve hours old had acquired its proper
proportions, proves that this is not the universal rule; for here the
characteristic differences must either have appeared at an earlier
period than usual, or, if not so, the differences must have been
inherited, not at the corresponding, but at an earlier age.

Now let us apply these facts and the above two principles—which latter,
though not proved true, can be shown to be in some degree probable—to
species in a state of nature. Let us take a genus of birds, descended
on my theory from some one parent-species, and of which the several new
species have become modified through natural selection in accordance
with their diverse habits. Then, from the many slight successive steps
of variation having supervened at a rather late age, and having been
inherited at a corresponding
age, the young of the new species of our supposed genus will manifestly
tend to resemble each other much more closely than do the adults, just
as we have seen in the case of pigeons. We may extend this view to
whole families or even classes. The fore-limbs, for instance, which
served as legs in the parent-species, may become, by a long course of
modification, adapted in one descendant to act as hands, in another as
paddles, in another as wings; and on the above two principles—namely of
each successive modification supervening at a rather late age, and
being inherited at a corresponding late age—the fore-limbs in the
embryos of the several descendants of the parent-species will still
resemble each other closely, for they will not have been modified. But
in each individual new species, the embryonic fore-limbs will differ
greatly from the fore-limbs in the mature animal; the limbs in the
latter having undergone much modification at a rather late period of
life, and having thus been converted into hands, or paddles, or wings.
Whatever influence long-continued exercise or use on the one hand, and
disuse on the other, may have in modifying an organ, such influence
will mainly affect the mature animal, which has come to its full powers
of activity and has to gain its own living; and the effects thus
produced will be inherited at a corresponding mature age. Whereas the
young will remain unmodified, or be modified in a lesser degree, by the
effects of use and disuse.

In certain cases the successive steps of variation might supervene,
from causes of which we are wholly ignorant, at a very early period of
life, or each step might be inherited at an earlier period than that at
which it first appeared. In either case (as with the short-faced
tumbler) the young or embryo would closely
resemble the mature parent-form. We have seen that this is the rule of
development in certain whole groups of animals, as with cuttle-fish and
spiders, and with a few members of the great class of insects, as with
Aphis. With respect to the final cause of the young in these cases not
undergoing any metamorphosis, or closely resembling their parents from
their earliest age, we can see that this would result from the two
following contingencies; firstly, from the young, during a course of
modification carried on for many generations, having to provide for
their own wants at a very early stage of development, and secondly,
from their following exactly the same habits of life with their
parents; for in this case, it would be indispensable for the existence
of the species, that the child should be modified at a very early age
in the same manner with its parents, in accordance with their similar
habits. Some further explanation, however, of the embryo not undergoing
any metamorphosis is perhaps requisite. If, on the other hand, it
profited the young to follow habits of life in any degree different
from those of their parent, and consequently to be constructed in a
slightly different manner, then, on the principle of inheritance at
corresponding ages, the active young or larvæ might easily be rendered
by natural selection different to any conceivable extent from their
parents. Such differences might, also, become correlated with
successive stages of development; so that the larvæ, in the first
stage, might differ greatly from the larvæ in the second stage, as we
have seen to be the case with cirripedes. The adult might become fitted
for sites or habits, in which organs of locomotion or of the senses,
etc., would be useless; and in this case the final metamorphosis would
be said to be retrograde.

As all the organic beings, extinct and recent, which
have ever lived on this earth have to be classed together, and as all
have been connected by the finest gradations, the best, or indeed, if
our collections were nearly perfect, the only possible arrangement,
would be genealogical. Descent being on my view the hidden bond of
connexion which naturalists have been seeking under the term of the
natural system. On this view we can understand how it is that, in the
eyes of most naturalists, the structure of the embryo is even more
important for classification than that of the adult. For the embryo is
the animal in its less modified state; and in so far it reveals the
structure of its progenitor. In two groups of animal, however much they
may at present differ from each other in structure and habits, if they
pass through the same or similar embryonic stages, we may feel assured
that they have both descended from the same or nearly similar parents,
and are therefore in that degree closely related. Thus, community in
embryonic structure reveals community of descent. It will reveal this
community of descent, however much the structure of the adult may have
been modified and obscured; we have seen, for instance, that cirripedes
can at once be recognised by their larvæ as belonging to the great
class of crustaceans. As the embryonic state of each species and group
of species partially shows us the structure of their less modified
ancient progenitors, we can clearly see why ancient and extinct forms
of life should resemble the embryos of their descendants,—our existing
species. Agassiz believes this to be a law of nature; but I am bound to
confess that I only hope to see the law hereafter proved true. It can
be proved true in those cases alone in which the ancient state, now
supposed to be represented in many embryos, has not been obliterated,
either by the successive variations in a long course of modification
having supervened
at a very early age, or by the variations having been inherited at an
earlier period than that at which they first appeared. It should also
be borne in mind, that the supposed law of resemblance of ancient forms
of life to the embryonic stages of recent forms, may be true, but yet,
owing to the geological record not extending far enough back in time,
may remain for a long period, or for ever, incapable of demonstration.

Thus, as it seems to me, the leading facts in embryology, which are
second in importance to none in natural history, are explained on the
principle of slight modifications not appearing, in the many
descendants from some one ancient progenitor, at a very early period in
the life of each, though perhaps caused at the earliest, and being
inherited at a corresponding not early period. Embryology rises greatly
in interest, when we thus look at the embryo as a picture, more or less
obscured, of the common parent-form of each great class of animals.

_Rudimentary, atrophied, or aborted organs_.—Organs or parts in this
strange condition, bearing the stamp of inutility, are extremely common
throughout nature. For instance, rudimentary mammæ are very general in
the males of mammals: I presume that the “bastard-wing” in birds may be
safely considered as a digit in a rudimentary state: in very many
snakes one lobe of the lungs is rudimentary; in other snakes there are
rudiments of the pelvis and hind limbs. Some of the cases of
rudimentary organs are extremely curious; for instance, the presence of
teeth in foetal whales, which when grown up have not a tooth in their
heads; and the presence of teeth, which never cut through the gums, in
the upper jaws of our unborn calves. It has even been stated on good
authority that rudiments of teeth can be detected
in the beaks of certain embryonic birds. Nothing can be plainer than
that wings are formed for flight, yet in how many insects do we see
wings so reduced in size as to be utterly incapable of flight, and not
rarely lying under wing-cases, firmly soldered together!

The meaning of rudimentary organs is often quite unmistakeable: for
instance there are beetles of the same genus (and even of the same
species) resembling each other most closely in all respects, one of
which will have full-sized wings, and another mere rudiments of
membrane; and here it is impossible to doubt, that the rudiments
represent wings. Rudimentary organs sometimes retain their
potentiality, and are merely not developed: this seems to be the case
with the mammæ of male mammals, for many instances are on record of
these organs having become well developed in full-grown males, and
having secreted milk. So again there are normally four developed and
two rudimentary teats in the udders of the genus Bos, but in our
domestic cows the two sometimes become developed and give milk. In
individual plants of the same species the petals sometimes occur as
mere rudiments, and sometimes in a well-developed state. In plants with
separated sexes, the male flowers often have a rudiment of a pistil;
and Kölreuter found that by crossing such male plants with an
hermaphrodite species, the rudiment of the pistil in the hybrid
offspring was much increased in size; and this shows that the rudiment
and the perfect pistil are essentially alike in nature.

An organ serving for two purposes, may become rudimentary or utterly
aborted for one, even the more important purpose; and remain perfectly
efficient for the other. Thus in plants, the office of the pistil is to
allow the pollen-tubes to reach the ovules protected in the ovarium at
its base. The pistil consists of a stigma
supported on the style; but in some Compositæ, the male florets, which
of course cannot be fecundated, have a pistil, which is in a
rudimentary state, for it is not crowned with a stigma; but the style
remains well developed, and is clothed with hairs as in other
compositæ, for the purpose of brushing the pollen out of the
surrounding anthers. Again, an organ may become rudimentary for its
proper purpose, and be used for a distinct object: in certain fish the
swim-bladder seems to be rudimentary for its proper function of giving
buoyancy, but has become converted into a nascent breathing organ or
lung. Other similar instances could be given.

Rudimentary organs in the individuals of the same species are very
liable to vary in degree of development and in other respects.
Moreover, in closely allied species, the degree to which the same organ
has been rendered rudimentary occasionally differs much. This latter
fact is well exemplified in the state of the wings of the female moths
in certain groups. Rudimentary organs may be utterly aborted; and this
implies, that we find in an animal or plant no trace of an organ, which
analogy would lead us to expect to find, and which is occasionally
found in monstrous individuals of the species. Thus in the snapdragon
(antirrhinum) we generally do not find a rudiment of a fifth stamen;
but this may sometimes be seen. In tracing the homologies of the same
part in different members of a class, nothing is more common, or more
necessary, than the use and discovery of rudiments. This is well shown
in the drawings given by Owen of the bones of the leg of the horse, ox,
and rhinoceros.

It is an important fact that rudimentary organs, such as teeth in the
upper jaws of whales and ruminants, can often be detected in the
embryo, but afterwards wholly disappear. It is also, I believe, a
universal
rule, that a rudimentary part or organ is of greater size relatively to
the adjoining parts in the embryo, than in the adult; so that the organ
at this early age is less rudimentary, or even cannot be said to be in
any degree rudimentary. Hence, also, a rudimentary organ in the adult,
is often said to have retained its embryonic condition.

I have now given the leading facts with respect to rudimentary organs.
In reflecting on them, every one must be struck with astonishment: for
the same reasoning power which tells us plainly that most parts and
organs are exquisitely adapted for certain purposes, tells us with
equal plainness that these rudimentary or atrophied organs, are
imperfect and useless. In works on natural history rudimentary organs
are generally said to have been created “for the sake of symmetry,” or
in order “to complete the scheme of nature;” but this seems to me no
explanation, merely a restatement of the fact. Would it be thought
sufficient to say that because planets revolve in elliptic courses
round the sun, satellites follow the same course round the planets, for
the sake of symmetry, and to complete the scheme of nature? An eminent
physiologist accounts for the presence of rudimentary organs, by
supposing that they serve to excrete matter in excess, or injurious to
the system; but can we suppose that the minute papilla, which often
represents the pistil in male flowers, and which is formed merely of
cellular tissue, can thus act? Can we suppose that the formation of
rudimentary teeth which are subsequently absorbed, can be of any
service to the rapidly growing embryonic calf by the excretion of
precious phosphate of lime? When a man’s fingers have been amputated,
imperfect nails sometimes appear on the stumps: I could as soon believe
that these vestiges of nails have appeared, not from unknown laws
of growth, but in order to excrete horny matter, as that the
rudimentary nails on the fin of the manatee were formed for this
purpose.

On my view of descent with modification, the origin of rudimentary
organs is simple. We have plenty of cases of rudimentary organs in our
domestic productions,—as the stump of a tail in tailless breeds,—the
vestige of an ear in earless breeds,—the reappearance of minute
dangling horns in hornless breeds of cattle, more especially, according
to Youatt, in young animals,—and the state of the whole flower in the
cauliflower. We often see rudiments of various parts in monsters. But I
doubt whether any of these cases throw light on the origin of
rudimentary organs in a state of nature, further than by showing that
rudiments can be produced; for I doubt whether species under nature
ever undergo abrupt changes. I believe that disuse has been the main
agency; that it has led in successive generations to the gradual
reduction of various organs, until they have become rudimentary,—as in
the case of the eyes of animals inhabiting dark caverns, and of the
wings of birds inhabiting oceanic islands, which have seldom been
forced to take flight, and have ultimately lost the power of flying.
Again, an organ useful under certain conditions, might become injurious
under others, as with the wings of beetles living on small and exposed
islands; and in this case natural selection would continue slowly to
reduce the organ, until it was rendered harmless and rudimentary.

Any change in function, which can be effected by insensibly small
steps, is within the power of natural selection; so that an organ
rendered, during changed habits of life, useless or injurious for one
purpose, might easily be modified and used for another purpose. Or an
organ might be retained for one alone of its
former functions. An organ, when rendered useless, may well be
variable, for its variations cannot be checked by natural selection. At
whatever period of life disuse or selection reduces an organ, and this
will generally be when the being has come to maturity and to its full
powers of action, the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages
will reproduce the organ in its reduced state at the same age, and
consequently will seldom affect or reduce it in the embryo. Thus we can
understand the greater relative size of rudimentary organs in the
embryo, and their lesser relative size in the adult. But if each step
of the process of reduction were to be inherited, not at the
corresponding age, but at an extremely early period of life (as we have
good reason to believe to be possible) the rudimentary part would tend
to be wholly lost, and we should have a case of complete abortion. The
principle, also, of economy, explained in a former chapter, by which
the materials forming any part or structure, if not useful to the
possessor, will be saved as far as is possible, will probably often
come into play; and this will tend to cause the entire obliteration of
a rudimentary organ.

As the presence of rudimentary organs is thus due to the tendency in
every part of the organisation, which has long existed, to be
inherited—we can understand, on the genealogical view of
classification, how it is that systematists have found rudimentary
parts as useful as, or even sometimes more useful than, parts of high
physiological importance. Rudimentary organs may be compared with the
letters in a word, still retained in the spelling, but become useless
in the pronunciation, but which serve as a clue in seeking for its
derivation. On the view of descent with modification, we may conclude
that the existence of organs in a rudimentary, imperfect, and useless
condition, or quite aborted, far
from presenting a strange difficulty, as they assuredly do on the
ordinary doctrine of creation, might even have been anticipated, and
can be accounted for by the laws of inheritance.

_Summary_.—In this chapter I have attempted to show, that the
subordination of group to group in all organisms throughout all time;
that the nature of the relationship, by which all living and extinct
beings are united by complex, radiating, and circuitous lines of
affinities into one grand system; the rules followed and the
difficulties encountered by naturalists in their classifications; the
value set upon characters, if constant and prevalent, whether of high
vital importance, or of the most trifling importance, or, as in
rudimentary organs, of no importance; the wide opposition in value
between analogical or adaptive characters, and characters of true
affinity; and other such rules;—all naturally follow on the view of the
common parentage of those forms which are considered by naturalists as
allied, together with their modification through natural selection,
with its contingencies of extinction and divergence of character. In
considering this view of classification, it should be borne in mind
that the element of descent has been universally used in ranking
together the sexes, ages, and acknowledged varieties of the same
species, however different they may be in structure. If we extend the
use of this element of descent,—the only certainly known cause of
similarity in organic beings,—we shall understand what is meant by the
natural system: it is genealogical in its attempted arrangement, with
the grades of acquired difference marked by the terms varieties,
species, genera, families, orders, and classes.

On this same view of descent with modification, all the great facts in
Morphology become intelligible,—whether
we look to the same pattern displayed in the homologous organs, to
whatever purpose applied, of the different species of a class; or to
the homologous parts constructed on the same pattern in each individual
animal and plant.

On the principle of successive slight variations, not necessarily or
generally supervening at a very early period of life, and being
inherited at a corresponding period, we can understand the great
leading facts in Embryology; namely, the resemblance in an individual
embryo of the homologous parts, which when matured will become widely
different from each other in structure and function; and the
resemblance in different species of a class of the homologous parts or
organs, though fitted in the adult members for purposes as different as
possible. Larvæ are active embryos, which have become specially
modified in relation to their habits of life, through the principle of
modifications being inherited at corresponding ages. On this same
principle—and bearing in mind, that when organs are reduced in size,
either from disuse or selection, it will generally be at that period of
life when the being has to provide for its own wants, and bearing in
mind how strong is the principle of inheritance—the occurrence of
rudimentary organs and their final abortion, present to us no
inexplicable difficulties; on the contrary, their presence might have
been even anticipated. The importance of embryological characters and
of rudimentary organs in classification is intelligible, on the view
that an arrangement is only so far natural as it is genealogical.

Finally, the several classes of facts which have been considered in
this chapter, seem to me to proclaim so plainly, that the innumerable
species, genera, and families of organic beings, with which this world
is
peopled, have all descended, each within its own class or group, from
common parents, and have all been modified in the course of descent,
that I should without hesitation adopt this view, even if it were
unsupported by other facts or arguments.




CHAPTER XIV.
RECAPITULATION AND CONCLUSION.


Recapitulation of the difficulties on the theory of Natural Selection.
Recapitulation of the general and special circumstances in its favour.
Causes of the general belief in the immutability of species. How far
the theory of natural selection may be extended. Effects of its
adoption on the study of Natural history. Concluding remarks.


As this whole volume is one long argument, it may be convenient to the
reader to have the leading facts and inferences briefly recapitulated.

That many and grave objections may be advanced against the theory of
descent with modification through natural selection, I do not deny. I
have endeavoured to give to them their full force. Nothing at first can
appear more difficult to believe than that the more complex organs and
instincts should have been perfected, not by means superior to, though
analogous with, human reason, but by the accumulation of innumerable
slight variations, each good for the individual possessor.
Nevertheless, this difficulty, though appearing to our imagination
insuperably great, cannot be considered real if we admit the following
propositions, namely,—that gradations in the perfection of any organ or
instinct, which we may consider, either do now exist or could have
existed, each good of its kind,—that all organs and instincts are, in
ever so slight a degree, variable,—and, lastly, that there is a
struggle for existence leading to the preservation of each profitable
deviation of structure or instinct. The truth of these propositions
cannot, I think, be disputed.


It is, no doubt, extremely difficult even to conjecture by what
gradations many structures have been perfected, more especially amongst
broken and failing groups of organic beings; but we see so many strange
gradations in nature, as is proclaimed by the canon, “Natura non facit
saltum,” that we ought to be extremely cautious in saying that any
organ or instinct, or any whole being, could not have arrived at its
present state by many graduated steps. There are, it must be admitted,
cases of special difficulty on the theory of natural selection; and one
of the most curious of these is the existence of two or three defined
castes of workers or sterile females in the same community of ants; but
I have attempted to show how this difficulty can be mastered.

With respect to the almost universal sterility of species when first
crossed, which forms so remarkable a contrast with the almost universal
fertility of varieties when crossed, I must refer the reader to the
recapitulation of the facts given at the end of the eighth chapter,
which seem to me conclusively to show that this sterility is no more a
special endowment than is the incapacity of two trees to be grafted
together, but that it is incidental on constitutional differences in
the reproductive systems of the intercrossed species. We see the truth
of this conclusion in the vast difference in the result, when the same
two species are crossed reciprocally; that is, when one species is
first used as the father and then as the mother.

The fertility of varieties when intercrossed and of their mongrel
offspring cannot be considered as universal; nor is their very general
fertility surprising when we remember that it is not likely that either
their constitutions or their reproductive systems should have been
profoundly modified. Moreover, most of the
varieties which have been experimentised on have been produced under
domestication; and as domestication apparently tends to eliminate
sterility, we ought not to expect it also to produce sterility.

The sterility of hybrids is a very different case from that of first
crosses, for their reproductive organs are more or less functionally
impotent; whereas in first crosses the organs on both sides are in a
perfect condition. As we continually see that organisms of all kinds
are rendered in some degree sterile from their constitutions having
been disturbed by slightly different and new conditions of life, we
need not feel surprise at hybrids being in some degree sterile, for
their constitutions can hardly fail to have been disturbed from being
compounded of two distinct organisations. This parallelism is supported
by another parallel, but directly opposite, class of facts; namely,
that the vigour and fertility of all organic beings are increased by
slight changes in their conditions of life, and that the offspring of
slightly modified forms or varieties acquire from being crossed
increased vigour and fertility. So that, on the one hand, considerable
changes in the conditions of life and crosses between greatly modified
forms, lessen fertility; and on the other hand, lesser changes in the
conditions of life and crosses between less modified forms, increase
fertility.

Turning to geographical distribution, the difficulties encountered on
the theory of descent with modification are grave enough. All the
individuals of the same species, and all the species of the same genus,
or even higher group, must have descended from common parents; and
therefore, in however distant and isolated parts of the world they are
now found, they must in the course of successive generations have
passed from some one part to the others. We are often wholly unable
even to conjecture how this could have been effected. Yet, as we have
reason to believe that some species have retained the same specific
form for very long periods, enormously long as measured by years, too
much stress ought not to be laid on the occasional wide diffusion of
the same species; for during very long periods of time there will
always be a good chance for wide migration by many means. A broken or
interrupted range may often be accounted for by the extinction of the
species in the intermediate regions. It cannot be denied that we are as
yet very ignorant of the full extent of the various climatal and
geographical changes which have affected the earth during modern
periods; and such changes will obviously have greatly facilitated
migration. As an example, I have attempted to show how potent has been
the influence of the Glacial period on the distribution both of the
same and of representative species throughout the world. We are as yet
profoundly ignorant of the many occasional means of transport. With
respect to distinct species of the same genus inhabiting very distant
and isolated regions, as the process of modification has necessarily
been slow, all the means of migration will have been possible during a
very long period; and consequently the difficulty of the wide diffusion
of species of the same genus is in some degree lessened.

As on the theory of natural selection an interminable number of
intermediate forms must have existed, linking together all the species
in each group by gradations as fine as our present varieties, it may be
asked, Why do we not see these linking forms all around us? Why are not
all organic beings blended together in an inextricable chaos? With
respect to existing forms, we should remember that we have no right to
expect (excepting in rare cases) to discover _directly_ connecting
links between them, but only between each and some extinct and
supplanted form. Even on a wide area, which has during a long period
remained continuous, and of which the climate and other conditions of
life change insensibly in going from a district occupied by one species
into another district occupied by a closely allied species, we have no
just right to expect often to find intermediate varieties in the
intermediate zone. For we have reason to believe that only a few
species are undergoing change at any one period; and all changes are
slowly effected. I have also shown that the intermediate varieties
which will at first probably exist in the intermediate zones, will be
liable to be supplanted by the allied forms on either hand; and the
latter, from existing in greater numbers, will generally be modified
and improved at a quicker rate than the intermediate varieties, which
exist in lesser numbers; so that the intermediate varieties will, in
the long run, be supplanted and exterminated.

On this doctrine of the extermination of an infinitude of connecting
links, between the living and extinct inhabitants of the world, and at
each successive period between the extinct and still older species, why
is not every geological formation charged with such links? Why does not
every collection of fossil remains afford plain evidence of the
gradation and mutation of the forms of life? We meet with no such
evidence, and this is the most obvious and forcible of the many
objections which may be urged against my theory. Why, again, do whole
groups of allied species appear, though certainly they often falsely
appear, to have come in suddenly on the several geological stages? Why
do we not find great piles of strata beneath the Silurian system,
stored with the remains of the progenitors of the Silurian groups of
fossils? For certainly on my theory such
strata must somewhere have been deposited at these ancient and utterly
unknown epochs in the world’s history.

I can answer these questions and grave objections only on the
supposition that the geological record is far more imperfect than most
geologists believe. It cannot be objected that there has not been time
sufficient for any amount of organic change; for the lapse of time has
been so great as to be utterly inappreciable by the human intellect.
The number of specimens in all our museums is absolutely as nothing
compared with the countless generations of countless species which
certainly have existed. We should not be able to recognise a species as
the parent of any one or more species if we were to examine them ever
so closely, unless we likewise possessed many of the intermediate links
between their past or parent and present states; and these many links
we could hardly ever expect to discover, owing to the imperfection of
the geological record. Numerous existing doubtful forms could be named
which are probably varieties; but who will pretend that in future ages
so many fossil links will be discovered, that naturalists will be able
to decide, on the common view, whether or not these doubtful forms are
varieties? As long as most of the links between any two species are
unknown, if any one link or intermediate variety be discovered, it will
simply be classed as another and distinct species. Only a small portion
of the world has been geologically explored. Only organic beings of
certain classes can be preserved in a fossil condition, at least in any
great number. Widely ranging species vary most, and varieties are often
at first local,—both causes rendering the discovery of intermediate
links less likely. Local varieties will not spread into other and
distant regions until they are considerably modified and improved;
and when they do spread, if discovered in a geological formation, they
will appear as if suddenly created there, and will be simply classed as
new species. Most formations have been intermittent in their
accumulation; and their duration, I am inclined to believe, has been
shorter than the average duration of specific forms. Successive
formations are separated from each other by enormous blank intervals of
time; for fossiliferous formations, thick enough to resist future
degradation, can be accumulated only where much sediment is deposited
on the subsiding bed of the sea. During the alternate periods of
elevation and of stationary level the record will be blank. During
these latter periods there will probably be more variability in the
forms of life; during periods of subsidence, more extinction.

With respect to the absence of fossiliferous formations beneath the
lowest Silurian strata, I can only recur to the hypothesis given in the
ninth chapter. That the geological record is imperfect all will admit;
but that it is imperfect to the degree which I require, few will be
inclined to admit. If we look to long enough intervals of time, geology
plainly declares that all species have changed; and they have changed
in the manner which my theory requires, for they have changed slowly
and in a graduated manner. We clearly see this in the fossil remains
from consecutive formations invariably being much more closely related
to each other, than are the fossils from formations distant from each
other in time.

Such is the sum of the several chief objections and difficulties which
may justly be urged against my theory; and I have now briefly
recapitulated the answers and explanations which can be given to them.
I have felt these difficulties far too heavily during many years to
doubt their weight. But it deserves especial notice that the more
important objections relate to questions on which we are confessedly
ignorant; nor do we know how ignorant we are. We do not know all the
possible transitional gradations between the simplest and the most
perfect organs; it cannot be pretended that we know all the varied
means of Distribution during the long lapse of years, or that we know
how imperfect the Geological Record is. Grave as these several
difficulties are, in my judgment they do not overthrow the theory of
descent with modification.

Now let us turn to the other side of the argument. Under domestication
we see much variability. This seems to be mainly due to the
reproductive system being eminently susceptible to changes in the
conditions of life; so that this system, when not rendered impotent,
fails to reproduce offspring exactly like the parent-form. Variability
is governed by many complex laws,—by correlation of growth, by use and
disuse, and by the direct action of the physical conditions of life.
There is much difficulty in ascertaining how much modification our
domestic productions have undergone; but we may safely infer that the
amount has been large, and that modifications can be inherited for long
periods. As long as the conditions of life remain the same, we have
reason to believe that a modification, which has already been inherited
for many generations, may continue to be inherited for an almost
infinite number of generations. On the other hand we have evidence that
variability, when it has once come into play, does not wholly cease;
for new varieties are still occasionally produced by our most anciently
domesticated productions.

Man does not actually produce variability; he only
unintentionally exposes organic beings to new conditions of life, and
then nature acts on the organisation, and causes variability. But man
can and does select the variations given to him by nature, and thus
accumulate them in any desired manner. He thus adapts animals and
plants for his own benefit or pleasure. He may do this methodically, or
he may do it unconsciously by preserving the individuals most useful to
him at the time, without any thought of altering the breed. It is
certain that he can largely influence the character of a breed by
selecting, in each successive generation, individual differences so
slight as to be quite inappreciable by an uneducated eye. This process
of selection has been the great agency in the production of the most
distinct and useful domestic breeds. That many of the breeds produced
by man have to a large extent the character of natural species, is
shown by the inextricable doubts whether very many of them are
varieties or aboriginal species.

There is no obvious reason why the principles which have acted so
efficiently under domestication should not have acted under nature. In
the preservation of favoured individuals and races, during the
constantly-recurrent Struggle for Existence, we see the most powerful
and ever-acting means of selection. The struggle for existence
inevitably follows from the high geometrical ratio of increase which is
common to all organic beings. This high rate of increase is proved by
calculation, by the effects of a succession of peculiar seasons, and by
the results of naturalisation, as explained in the third chapter. More
individuals are born than can possibly survive. A grain in the balance
will determine which individual shall live and which shall die,—which
variety or species shall increase in number, and which shall decrease,
or finally become extinct. As the individuals
of the same species come in all respects into the closest competition
with each other, the struggle will generally be most severe between
them; it will be almost equally severe between the varieties of the
same species, and next in severity between the species of the same
genus. But the struggle will often be very severe between beings most
remote in the scale of nature. The slightest advantage in one being, at
any age or during any season, over those with which it comes into
competition, or better adaptation in however slight a degree to the
surrounding physical conditions, will turn the balance.

With animals having separated sexes there will in most cases be a
struggle between the males for possession of the females. The most
vigorous individuals, or those which have most successfully struggled
with their conditions of life, will generally leave most progeny. But
success will often depend on having special weapons or means of
defence, or on the charms of the males; and the slightest advantage
will lead to victory.

As geology plainly proclaims that each land has undergone great
physical changes, we might have expected that organic beings would have
varied under nature, in the same way as they generally have varied
under the changed conditions of domestication. And if there be any
variability under nature, it would be an unaccountable fact if natural
selection had not come into play. It has often been asserted, but the
assertion is quite incapable of proof, that the amount of variation
under nature is a strictly limited quantity. Man, though acting on
external characters alone and often capriciously, can produce within a
short period a great result by adding up mere individual differences in
his domestic productions; and every one admits that there are at least
individual differences in species under nature. But, besides such
differences, all naturalists
have admitted the existence of varieties, which they think sufficiently
distinct to be worthy of record in systematic works. No one can draw
any clear distinction between individual differences and slight
varieties; or between more plainly marked varieties and sub-species,
and species. Let it be observed how naturalists differ in the rank
which they assign to the many representative forms in Europe and North
America.

If then we have under nature variability and a powerful agent always
ready to act and select, why should we doubt that variations in any way
useful to beings, under their excessively complex relations of life,
would be preserved, accumulated, and inherited? Why, if man can by
patience select variations most useful to himself, should nature fail
in selecting variations useful, under changing conditions of life, to
her living products? What limit can be put to this power, acting during
long ages and rigidly scrutinising the whole constitution, structure,
and habits of each creature,—favouring the good and rejecting the bad?
I can see no limit to this power, in slowly and beautifully adapting
each form to the most complex relations of life. The theory of natural
selection, even if we looked no further than this, seems to me to be in
itself probable. I have already recapitulated, as fairly as I could,
the opposed difficulties and objections: now let us turn to the special
facts and arguments in favour of the theory.

On the view that species are only strongly marked and permanent
varieties, and that each species first existed as a variety, we can see
why it is that no line of demarcation can be drawn between species,
commonly supposed to have been produced by special acts of creation,
and varieties which are acknowledged to have been produced by secondary
laws. On this same view we can understand how it is that in each region
where many species of a genus have been produced, and where they now
flourish, these same species should present many varieties; for where
the manufactory of species has been active, we might expect, as a
general rule, to find it still in action; and this is the case if
varieties be incipient species. Moreover, the species of the larger
genera, which afford the greater number of varieties or incipient
species, retain to a certain degree the character of varieties; for
they differ from each other by a less amount of difference than do the
species of smaller genera. The closely allied species also of the
larger genera apparently have restricted ranges, and they are clustered
in little groups round other species—in which respects they resemble
varieties. These are strange relations on the view of each species
having been independently created, but are intelligible if all species
first existed as varieties.

As each species tends by its geometrical ratio of reproduction to
increase inordinately in number; and as the modified descendants of
each species will be enabled to increase by so much the more as they
become more diversified in habits and structure, so as to be enabled to
seize on many and widely different places in the economy of nature,
there will be a constant tendency in natural selection to preserve the
most divergent offspring of any one species. Hence during a
long-continued course of modification, the slight differences,
characteristic of varieties of the same species, tend to be augmented
into the greater differences characteristic of species of the same
genus. New and improved varieties will inevitably supplant and
exterminate the older, less improved and intermediate varieties; and
thus species are rendered to a large extent defined and distinct
objects. Dominant species belonging to the larger groups tend to give
birth to new and dominant
forms; so that each large group tends to become still larger, and at
the same time more divergent in character. But as all groups cannot
thus succeed in increasing in size, for the world would not hold them,
the more dominant groups beat the less dominant. This tendency in the
large groups to go on increasing in size and diverging in character,
together with the almost inevitable contingency of much extinction,
explains the arrangement of all the forms of life, in groups
subordinate to groups, all within a few great classes, which we now see
everywhere around us, and which has prevailed throughout all time. This
grand fact of the grouping of all organic beings seems to me utterly
inexplicable on the theory of creation.

As natural selection acts solely by accumulating slight, successive,
favourable variations, it can produce no great or sudden modification;
it can act only by very short and slow steps. Hence the canon of
“Natura non facit saltum,” which every fresh addition to our knowledge
tends to make more strictly correct, is on this theory simply
intelligible. We can plainly see why nature is prodigal in variety,
though niggard in innovation. But why this should be a law of nature if
each species has been independently created, no man can explain.

Many other facts are, as it seems to me, explicable on this theory. How
strange it is that a bird, under the form of woodpecker, should have
been created to prey on insects on the ground; that upland geese, which
never or rarely swim, should have been created with webbed feet; that a
thrush should have been created to dive and feed on sub-aquatic
insects; and that a petrel should have been created with habits and
structure fitting it for the life of an auk or grebe! and so on in
endless other cases. But on the view of each
species constantly trying to increase in number, with natural selection
always ready to adapt the slowly varying descendants of each to any
unoccupied or ill-occupied place in nature, these facts cease to be
strange, or perhaps might even have been anticipated.

As natural selection acts by competition, it adapts the inhabitants of
each country only in relation to the degree of perfection of their
associates; so that we need feel no surprise at the inhabitants of any
one country, although on the ordinary view supposed to have been
specially created and adapted for that country, being beaten and
supplanted by the naturalised productions from another land. Nor ought
we to marvel if all the contrivances in nature be not, as far as we can
judge, absolutely perfect; and if some of them be abhorrent to our
ideas of fitness. We need not marvel at the sting of the bee causing
the bee’s own death; at drones being produced in such vast numbers for
one single act, and being then slaughtered by their sterile sisters; at
the astonishing waste of pollen by our fir-trees; at the instinctive
hatred of the queen bee for her own fertile daughters; at ichneumonidæ
feeding within the live bodies of caterpillars; and at other such
cases. The wonder indeed is, on the theory of natural selection, that
more cases of the want of absolute perfection have not been observed.

The complex and little known laws governing variation are the same, as
far as we can see, with the laws which have governed the production of
so-called specific forms. In both cases physical conditions seem to
have produced but little direct effect; yet when varieties enter any
zone, they occasionally assume some of the characters of the species
proper to that zone. In both varieties and species, use and disuse seem
to have produced some effect; for it is difficult to resist this
conclusion
when we look, for instance, at the logger-headed duck, which has wings
incapable of flight, in nearly the same condition as in the domestic
duck; or when we look at the burrowing tucutucu, which is occasionally
blind, and then at certain moles, which are habitually blind and have
their eyes covered with skin; or when we look at the blind animals
inhabiting the dark caves of America and Europe. In both varieties and
species correlation of growth seems to have played a most important
part, so that when one part has been modified other parts are
necessarily modified. In both varieties and species reversions to
long-lost characters occur. How inexplicable on the theory of creation
is the occasional appearance of stripes on the shoulder and legs of the
several species of the horse-genus and in their hybrids! How simply is
this fact explained if we believe that these species have descended
from a striped progenitor, in the same manner as the several domestic
breeds of pigeon have descended from the blue and barred rock-pigeon!

On the ordinary view of each species having been independently created,
why should the specific characters, or those by which the species of
the same genus differ from each other, be more variable than the
generic characters in which they all agree? Why, for instance, should
the colour of a flower be more likely to vary in any one species of a
genus, if the other species, supposed to have been created
independently, have differently coloured flowers, than if all the
species of the genus have the same coloured flowers? If species are
only well-marked varieties, of which the characters have become in a
high degree permanent, we can understand this fact; for they have
already varied since they branched off from a common progenitor in
certain characters, by which they have come to be specifically distinct
from each other;
and therefore these same characters would be more likely still to be
variable than the generic characters which have been inherited without
change for an enormous period. It is inexplicable on the theory of
creation why a part developed in a very unusual manner in any one
species of a genus, and therefore, as we may naturally infer, of great
importance to the species, should be eminently liable to variation;
but, on my view, this part has undergone, since the several species
branched off from a common progenitor, an unusual amount of variability
and modification, and therefore we might expect this part generally to
be still variable. But a part may be developed in the most unusual
manner, like the wing of a bat, and yet not be more variable than any
other structure, if the part be common to many subordinate forms, that
is, if it has been inherited for a very long period; for in this case
it will have been rendered constant by long-continued natural
selection.

Glancing at instincts, marvellous as some are, they offer no greater
difficulty than does corporeal structure on the theory of the natural
selection of successive, slight, but profitable modifications. We can
thus understand why nature moves by graduated steps in endowing
different animals of the same class with their several instincts. I
have attempted to show how much light the principle of gradation throws
on the admirable architectural powers of the hive-bee. Habit no doubt
sometimes comes into play in modifying instincts; but it certainly is
not indispensable, as we see, in the case of neuter insects, which
leave no progeny to inherit the effects of long-continued habit. On the
view of all the species of the same genus having descended from a
common parent, and having inherited much in common, we can understand
how it is that allied species, when placed under considerably different
conditions of life,
yet should follow nearly the same instincts; why the thrush of South
America, for instance, lines her nest with mud like our British
species. On the view of instincts having been slowly acquired through
natural selection we need not marvel at some instincts being apparently
not perfect and liable to mistakes, and at many instincts causing other
animals to suffer.

If species be only well-marked and permanent varieties, we can at once
see why their crossed offspring should follow the same complex laws in
their degrees and kinds of resemblance to their parents,—in being
absorbed into each other by successive crosses, and in other such
points,—as do the crossed offspring of acknowledged varieties. On the
other hand, these would be strange facts if species have been
independently created, and varieties have been produced by secondary
laws.

If we admit that the geological record is imperfect in an extreme
degree, then such facts as the record gives, support the theory of
descent with modification. New species have come on the stage slowly
and at successive intervals; and the amount of change, after equal
intervals of time, is widely different in different groups. The
extinction of species and of whole groups of species, which has played
so conspicuous a part in the history of the organic world, almost
inevitably follows on the principle of natural selection; for old forms
will be supplanted by new and improved forms. Neither single species
nor groups of species reappear when the chain of ordinary generation
has once been broken. The gradual diffusion of dominant forms, with the
slow modification of their descendants, causes the forms of life, after
long intervals of time, to appear as if they had changed simultaneously
throughout the world. The fact of the fossil remains of each formation
being in some degree intermediate in character between the
fossils in the formations above and below, is simply explained by their
intermediate position in the chain of descent. The grand fact that all
extinct organic beings belong to the same system with recent beings,
falling either into the same or into intermediate groups, follows from
the living and the extinct being the offspring of common parents. As
the groups which have descended from an ancient progenitor have
generally diverged in character, the progenitor with its early
descendants will often be intermediate in character in comparison with
its later descendants; and thus we can see why the more ancient a
fossil is, the oftener it stands in some degree intermediate between
existing and allied groups. Recent forms are generally looked at as
being, in some vague sense, higher than ancient and extinct forms; and
they are in so far higher as the later and more improved forms have
conquered the older and less improved organic beings in the struggle
for life. Lastly, the law of the long endurance of allied forms on the
same continent,—of marsupials in Australia, of edentata in America, and
other such cases,—is intelligible, for within a confined country, the
recent and the extinct will naturally be allied by descent.

Looking to geographical distribution, if we admit that there has been
during the long course of ages much migration from one part of the
world to another, owing to former climatal and geographical changes and
to the many occasional and unknown means of dispersal, then we can
understand, on the theory of descent with modification, most of the
great leading facts in Distribution. We can see why there should be so
striking a parallelism in the distribution of organic beings throughout
space, and in their geological succession throughout time; for in both
cases the beings have been connected by the bond of ordinary
generation, and the means of
modification have been the same. We see the full meaning of the
wonderful fact, which must have struck every traveller, namely, that on
the same continent, under the most diverse conditions, under heat and
cold, on mountain and lowland, on deserts and marshes, most of the
inhabitants within each great class are plainly related; for they will
generally be descendants of the same progenitors and early colonists.
On this same principle of former migration, combined in most cases with
modification, we can understand, by the aid of the Glacial period, the
identity of some few plants, and the close alliance of many others, on
the most distant mountains, under the most different climates; and
likewise the close alliance of some of the inhabitants of the sea in
the northern and southern temperate zones, though separated by the
whole intertropical ocean. Although two areas may present the same
physical conditions of life, we need feel no surprise at their
inhabitants being widely different, if they have been for a long period
completely separated from each other; for as the relation of organism
to organism is the most important of all relations, and as the two
areas will have received colonists from some third source or from each
other, at various periods and in different proportions, the course of
modification in the two areas will inevitably be different.

On this view of migration, with subsequent modification, we can see why
oceanic islands should be inhabited by few species, but of these, that
many should be peculiar. We can clearly see why those animals which
cannot cross wide spaces of ocean, as frogs and terrestrial mammals,
should not inhabit oceanic islands; and why, on the other hand, new and
peculiar species of bats, which can traverse the ocean, should so often
be found on islands far distant from any continent. Such facts
as the presence of peculiar species of bats, and the absence of all
other mammals, on oceanic islands, are utterly inexplicable on the
theory of independent acts of creation.

The existence of closely allied or representative species in any two
areas, implies, on the theory of descent with modification, that the
same parents formerly inhabited both areas; and we almost invariably
find that wherever many closely allied species inhabit two areas, some
identical species common to both still exist. Wherever many closely
allied yet distinct species occur, many doubtful forms and varieties of
the same species likewise occur. It is a rule of high generality that
the inhabitants of each area are related to the inhabitants of the
nearest source whence immigrants might have been derived. We see this
in nearly all the plants and animals of the Galapagos archipelago, of
Juan Fernandez, and of the other American islands being related in the
most striking manner to the plants and animals of the neighbouring
American mainland; and those of the Cape de Verde archipelago and other
African islands to the African mainland. It must be admitted that these
facts receive no explanation on the theory of creation.

The fact, as we have seen, that all past and present organic beings
constitute one grand natural system, with group subordinate to group,
and with extinct groups often falling in between recent groups, is
intelligible on the theory of natural selection with its contingencies
of extinction and divergence of character. On these same principles we
see how it is, that the mutual affinities of the species and genera
within each class are so complex and circuitous. We see why certain
characters are far more serviceable than others for classification;—why
adaptive characters, though of paramount importance to the being, are
of hardly any
importance in classification; why characters derived from rudimentary
parts, though of no service to the being, are often of high
classificatory value; and why embryological characters are the most
valuable of all. The real affinities of all organic beings are due to
inheritance or community of descent. The natural system is a
genealogical arrangement, in which we have to discover the lines of
descent by the most permanent characters, however slight their vital
importance may be.

The framework of bones being the same in the hand of a man, wing of a
bat, fin of the porpoise, and leg of the horse,—the same number of
vertebræ forming the neck of the giraffe and of the elephant,—and
innumerable other such facts, at once explain themselves on the theory
of descent with slow and slight successive modifications. The
similarity of pattern in the wing and leg of a bat, though used for
such different purpose,—in the jaws and legs of a crab,—in the petals,
stamens, and pistils of a flower, is likewise intelligible on the view
of the gradual modification of parts or organs, which were alike in the
early progenitor of each class. On the principle of successive
variations not always supervening at an early age, and being inherited
at a corresponding not early period of life, we can clearly see why the
embryos of mammals, birds, reptiles, and fishes should be so closely
alike, and should be so unlike the adult forms. We may cease marvelling
at the embryo of an air-breathing mammal or bird having branchial slits
and arteries running in loops, like those in a fish which has to
breathe the air dissolved in water, by the aid of well-developed
branchiæ.

Disuse, aided sometimes by natural selection, will often tend to reduce
an organ, when it has become useless by changed habits or under changed
conditions
of life; and we can clearly understand on this view the meaning of
rudimentary organs. But disuse and selection will generally act on each
creature, when it has come to maturity and has to play its full part in
the struggle for existence, and will thus have little power of acting
on an organ during early life; hence the organ will not be much reduced
or rendered rudimentary at this early age. The calf, for instance, has
inherited teeth, which never cut through the gums of the upper jaw,
from an early progenitor having well-developed teeth; and we may
believe, that the teeth in the mature animal were reduced, during
successive generations, by disuse or by the tongue and palate having
been fitted by natural selection to browse without their aid; whereas
in the calf, the teeth have been left untouched by selection or disuse,
and on the principle of inheritance at corresponding ages have been
inherited from a remote period to the present day. On the view of each
organic being and each separate organ having been specially created,
how utterly inexplicable it is that parts, like the teeth in the
embryonic calf or like the shrivelled wings under the soldered
wing-covers of some beetles, should thus so frequently bear the plain
stamp of inutility! Nature may be said to have taken pains to reveal,
by rudimentary organs and by homologous structures, her scheme of
modification, which it seems that we wilfully will not understand.

I have now recapitulated the chief facts and considerations which have
thoroughly convinced me that species have changed, and are still slowly
changing by the preservation and accumulation of successive slight
favourable variations. Why, it may be asked, have all the most eminent
living naturalists and geologists rejected this view of the mutability
of species? It cannot be
asserted that organic beings in a state of nature are subject to no
variation; it cannot be proved that the amount of variation in the
course of long ages is a limited quantity; no clear distinction has
been, or can be, drawn between species and well-marked varieties. It
cannot be maintained that species when intercrossed are invariably
sterile, and varieties invariably fertile; or that sterility is a
special endowment and sign of creation. The belief that species were
immutable productions was almost unavoidable as long as the history of
the world was thought to be of short duration; and now that we have
acquired some idea of the lapse of time, we are too apt to assume,
without proof, that the geological record is so perfect that it would
have afforded us plain evidence of the mutation of species, if they had
undergone mutation.

But the chief cause of our natural unwillingness to admit that one
species has given birth to other and distinct species, is that we are
always slow in admitting any great change of which we do not see the
intermediate steps. The difficulty is the same as that felt by so many
geologists, when Lyell first insisted that long lines of inland cliffs
had been formed, and great valleys excavated, by the slow action of the
coast-waves. The mind cannot possibly grasp the full meaning of the
term of a hundred million years; it cannot add up and perceive the full
effects of many slight variations, accumulated during an almost
infinite number of generations.

Although I am fully convinced of the truth of the views given in this
volume under the form of an abstract, I by no means expect to convince
experienced naturalists whose minds are stocked with a multitude of
facts all viewed, during a long course of years, from a point of view
directly opposite to mine. It is so easy
to hide our ignorance under such expressions as the “plan of creation,”
“unity of design,” etc., and to think that we give an explanation when
we only restate a fact. Any one whose disposition leads him to attach
more weight to unexplained difficulties than to the explanation of a
certain number of facts will certainly reject my theory. A few
naturalists, endowed with much flexibility of mind, and who have
already begun to doubt on the immutability of species, may be
influenced by this volume; but I look with confidence to the future, to
young and rising naturalists, who will be able to view both sides of
the question with impartiality. Whoever is led to believe that species
are mutable will do good service by conscientiously expressing his
conviction; for only thus can the load of prejudice by which this
subject is overwhelmed be removed.

Several eminent naturalists have of late published their belief that a
multitude of reputed species in each genus are not real species; but
that other species are real, that is, have been independently created.
This seems to me a strange conclusion to arrive at. They admit that a
multitude of forms, which till lately they themselves thought were
special creations, and which are still thus looked at by the majority
of naturalists, and which consequently have every external
characteristic feature of true species,—they admit that these have been
produced by variation, but they refuse to extend the same view to other
and very slightly different forms. Nevertheless they do not pretend
that they can define, or even conjecture, which are the created forms
of life, and which are those produced by secondary laws. They admit
variation as a _vera causa_ in one case, they arbitrarily reject it in
another, without assigning any distinction in the two cases. The day
will come when this will be given as a curious illustration of
the blindness of preconceived opinion. These authors seem no more
startled at a miraculous act of creation than at an ordinary birth. But
do they really believe that at innumerable periods in the earth’s
history certain elemental atoms have been commanded suddenly to flash
into living tissues? Do they believe that at each supposed act of
creation one individual or many were produced? Were all the infinitely
numerous kinds of animals and plants created as eggs or seed, or as
full grown? and in the case of mammals, were they created bearing the
false marks of nourishment from the mother’s womb? Although naturalists
very properly demand a full explanation of every difficulty from those
who believe in the mutability of species, on their own side they ignore
the whole subject of the first appearance of species in what they
consider reverent silence.

It may be asked how far I extend the doctrine of the modification of
species. The question is difficult to answer, because the more distinct
the forms are which we may consider, by so much the arguments fall away
in force. But some arguments of the greatest weight extend very far.
All the members of whole classes can be connected together by chains of
affinities, and all can be classified on the same principle, in groups
subordinate to groups. Fossil remains sometimes tend to fill up very
wide intervals between existing orders. Organs in a rudimentary
condition plainly show that an early progenitor had the organ in a
fully developed state; and this in some instances necessarily implies
an enormous amount of modification in the descendants. Throughout whole
classes various structures are formed on the same pattern, and at an
embryonic age the species closely resemble each other. Therefore I
cannot doubt that the theory of descent with modification
embraces all the members of the same class. I believe that animals have
descended from at most only four or five progenitors, and plants from
an equal or lesser number.

Analogy would lead me one step further, namely, to the belief that all
animals and plants have descended from some one prototype. But analogy
may be a deceitful guide. Nevertheless all living things have much in
common, in their chemical composition, their germinal vesicles, their
cellular structure, and their laws of growth and reproduction. We see
this even in so trifling a circumstance as that the same poison often
similarly affects plants and animals; or that the poison secreted by
the gall-fly produces monstrous growths on the wild rose or oak-tree.
Therefore I should infer from analogy that probably all the organic
beings which have ever lived on this earth have descended from some one
primordial form, into which life was first breathed.

When the views entertained in this volume on the origin of species, or
when analogous views are generally admitted, we can dimly foresee that
there will be a considerable revolution in natural history.
Systematists will be able to pursue their labours as at present; but
they will not be incessantly haunted by the shadowy doubt whether this
or that form be in essence a species. This I feel sure, and I speak
after experience, will be no slight relief. The endless disputes
whether or not some fifty species of British brambles are true species
will cease. Systematists will have only to decide (not that this will
be easy) whether any form be sufficiently constant and distinct from
other forms, to be capable of definition; and if definable, whether the
differences be sufficiently important to deserve a specific name. This
latter point will become a far more essential consideration
than it is at present; for differences, however slight, between any two
forms, if not blended by intermediate gradations, are looked at by most
naturalists as sufficient to raise both forms to the rank of species.
Hereafter we shall be compelled to acknowledge that the only
distinction between species and well-marked varieties is, that the
latter are known, or believed, to be connected at the present day by
intermediate gradations, whereas species were formerly thus connected.
Hence, without quite rejecting the consideration of the present
existence of intermediate gradations between any two forms, we shall be
led to weigh more carefully and to value higher the actual amount of
difference between them. It is quite possible that forms now generally
acknowledged to be merely varieties may hereafter be thought worthy of
specific names, as with the primrose and cowslip; and in this case
scientific and common language will come into accordance. In short, we
shall have to treat species in the same manner as those naturalists
treat genera, who admit that genera are merely artificial combinations
made for convenience. This may not be a cheering prospect; but we shall
at least be freed from the vain search for the undiscovered and
undiscoverable essence of the term species.

The other and more general departments of natural history will rise
greatly in interest. The terms used by naturalists of affinity,
relationship, community of type, paternity, morphology, adaptive
characters, rudimentary and aborted organs, etc., will cease to be
metaphorical, and will have a plain signification. When we no longer
look at an organic being as a savage looks at a ship, as at something
wholly beyond his comprehension; when we regard every production of
nature as one which has had a history; when we contemplate every
complex structure
and instinct as the summing up of many contrivances, each useful to the
possessor, nearly in the same way as when we look at any great
mechanical invention as the summing up of the labour, the experience,
the reason, and even the blunders of numerous workmen; when we thus
view each organic being, how far more interesting, I speak from
experience, will the study of natural history become!

A grand and almost untrodden field of inquiry will be opened, on the
causes and laws of variation, on correlation of growth, on the effects
of use and disuse, on the direct action of external conditions, and so
forth. The study of domestic productions will rise immensely in value.
A new variety raised by man will be a far more important and
interesting subject for study than one more species added to the
infinitude of already recorded species. Our classifications will come
to be, as far as they can be so made, genealogies; and will then truly
give what may be called the plan of creation. The rules for classifying
will no doubt become simpler when we have a definite object in view. We
possess no pedigrees or armorial bearings; and we have to discover and
trace the many diverging lines of descent in our natural genealogies,
by characters of any kind which have long been inherited. Rudimentary
organs will speak infallibly with respect to the nature of long-lost
structures. Species and groups of species, which are called aberrant,
and which may fancifully be called living fossils, will aid us in
forming a picture of the ancient forms of life. Embryology will reveal
to us the structure, in some degree obscured, of the prototypes of each
great class.

When we can feel assured that all the individuals of the same species,
and all the closely allied species of most genera, have within a not
very remote period descended
from one parent, and have migrated from some one birthplace; and when
we better know the many means of migration, then, by the light which
geology now throws, and will continue to throw, on former changes of
climate and of the level of the land, we shall surely be enabled to
trace in an admirable manner the former migrations of the inhabitants
of the whole world. Even at present, by comparing the differences of
the inhabitants of the sea on the opposite sides of a continent, and
the nature of the various inhabitants of that continent in relation to
their apparent means of immigration, some light can be thrown on
ancient geography.

The noble science of Geology loses glory from the extreme imperfection
of the record. The crust of the earth with its embedded remains must
not be looked at as a well-filled museum, but as a poor collection made
at hazard and at rare intervals. The accumulation of each great
fossiliferous formation will be recognised as having depended on an
unusual concurrence of circumstances, and the blank intervals between
the successive stages as having been of vast duration. But we shall be
able to gauge with some security the duration of these intervals by a
comparison of the preceding and succeeding organic forms. We must be
cautious in attempting to correlate as strictly contemporaneous two
formations, which include few identical species, by the general
succession of their forms of life. As species are produced and
exterminated by slowly acting and still existing causes, and not by
miraculous acts of creation and by catastrophes; and as the most
important of all causes of organic change is one which is almost
independent of altered and perhaps suddenly altered physical
conditions, namely, the mutual relation of organism to organism,—the
improvement of one being entailing the improvement or the extermination
of
others; it follows, that the amount of organic change in the fossils of
consecutive formations probably serves as a fair measure of the lapse
of actual time. A number of species, however, keeping in a body might
remain for a long period unchanged, whilst within this same period,
several of these species, by migrating into new countries and coming
into competition with foreign associates, might become modified; so
that we must not overrate the accuracy of organic change as a measure
of time. During early periods of the earth’s history, when the forms of
life were probably fewer and simpler, the rate of change was probably
slower; and at the first dawn of life, when very few forms of the
simplest structure existed, the rate of change may have been slow in an
extreme degree. The whole history of the world, as at present known,
although of a length quite incomprehensible by us, will hereafter be
recognised as a mere fragment of time, compared with the ages which
have elapsed since the first creature, the progenitor of innumerable
extinct and living descendants, was created.

In the distant future I see open fields for far more important
researches. Psychology will be based on a new foundation, that of the
necessary acquirement of each mental power and capacity by gradation.
Light will be thrown on the origin of man and his history.

Authors of the highest eminence seem to be fully satisfied with the
view that each species has been independently created. To my mind it
accords better with what we know of the laws impressed on matter by the
Creator, that the production and extinction of the past and present
inhabitants of the world should have been due to secondary causes, like
those determining the birth and death of the individual. When I view
all beings not as special creations, but as the lineal descendants of
some few beings which lived long before the
first bed of the Silurian system was deposited, they seem to me to
become ennobled. Judging from the past, we may safely infer that not
one living species will transmit its unaltered likeness to a distant
futurity. And of the species now living very few will transmit progeny
of any kind to a far distant futurity; for the manner in which all
organic beings are grouped, shows that the greater number of species of
each genus, and all the species of many genera, have left no
descendants, but have become utterly extinct. We can so far take a
prophetic glance into futurity as to foretel that it will be the common
and widely-spread species, belonging to the larger and dominant groups,
which will ultimately prevail and procreate new and dominant species.
As all the living forms of life are the lineal descendants of those
which lived long before the Silurian epoch, we may feel certain that
the ordinary succession by generation has never once been broken, and
that no cataclysm has desolated the whole world. Hence we may look with
some confidence to a secure future of equally inappreciable length. And
as natural selection works solely by and for the good of each being,
all corporeal and mental endowments will tend to progress towards
perfection.

It is interesting to contemplate an entangled bank, clothed with many
plants of many kinds, with birds singing on the bushes, with various
insects flitting about, and with worms crawling through the damp earth,
and to reflect that these elaborately constructed forms, so different
from each other, and dependent on each other in so complex a manner,
have all been produced by laws acting around us. These laws, taken in
the largest sense, being Growth with Reproduction; Inheritance which is
almost implied by reproduction; Variability from the indirect and
direct action of the external conditions
of life, and from use and disuse; a Ratio of Increase so high as to
lead to a Struggle for Life, and as a consequence to Natural Selection,
entailing Divergence of Character and the Extinction of less-improved
forms. Thus, from the war of nature, from famine and death, the most
exalted object which we are capable of conceiving, namely, the
production of the higher animals, directly follows. There is grandeur
in this view of life, with its several powers, having been originally
breathed into a few forms or into one; and that, whilst this planet has
gone cycling on according to the fixed law of gravity, from so simple a
beginning endless forms most beautiful and most wonderful have been,
and are being, evolved.